VOLUME 47 | SUPPLEMENT 1 | PAGES S1–S322
Standards of Care 
in Diabetes—2024
JANUARY 2024  | VOLUME 47  |  SUPPLEMENT 1
WWW.DIABETESJOURNALS.ORG/CARE
THE JOURNAL OF CLINICAL AND APPLIED RESEARCH AND EDUCATION
ISSN 0149-5992
JANUARY 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

American Diabetes Association
Standards of Care in
Diabetesd
©
 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this work as long as the work is properly
cited, the use is educational and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered. Readers may link to the version of
record of this work on https://diabetesjournals.org/care        but ADA permission is required to post this work on
any third-party website or platform. Requests to reuse or repurpose; adapt or modify; or post, display, or
distribute this work may be sent to permissions@diabetes.org.
2024
2023
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

January 2024 Volume 47, Supplement 1 
[T]he simple word Care may suffice to express [the journal's] philosophical 
mission. The new journal is designed to promote better patient care by 
serving the expanded needs of all health professionals committed to the care 
of patients with diabetes. As such, the American Diabetes Association views 
Diabetes Care as a reaffirmation of Francis Weld Peabody's contention that 
“the secret of the care of the patient is in caring for the patient.” 
—Norbert Freinkel, Diabetes Care, January-February 1978 
EDITOR IN CHIEF 
Steven E. Kahn, MB, ChB  
DEPUTY EDITORS 
Cheryl A.M. Anderson, PhD, MPH, MS 
John B. Buse, MD, PhD 
Elizabeth Selvin, PhD, MPH  
AD HOC EDITORS 
Mark A. Atkinson, PhD 
George Bakris, MD 
Frank B. Hu, MD, MPH, PhD 
Stephen S. Rich, PhD 
Matthew C. Riddle, MD  
ASSOCIATE EDITORS 
Sonia Y. Angell, MD, MPH, DTM&H, FACP 
Vanita R. Aroda, MD 
Alice Y.Y. Cheng, MD, FRCPC 
Thomas P.A. Danne, MD 
Justin B. Echouffo Tcheugui, MD, PhD, MPhil 
Stephanie L. Fitzpatrick, PhD 
Meghana D. Gadgil, MD, MPH 
Amalia Gastaldelli, PhD 
Jennifer B. Green, MD  
Ania M. Jastreboff, MD, PhD 
Alka M. Kanaya, MD 
Namratha R. Kandula, MD, MPH 
Csaba P. Kovesdy, MD, FASN 
Neda Laiteerapong, MD, MS 
Kristen J. Nadeau, MD, MS 
Jeremy Pettus, MD 
Rodica Pop-Busui, MD, PhD 
Jennifer E. Posey, MD, PhD, FACMG  
Camille E. Powe, MD 
Casey M. Rebholz, PhD, MS, MNSP, MPH, FAHA 
Michael R. Rickels, MD, MS 
Naveed Sattar, FMedSci, FRCPath, FRCPGlas, FRSE 
Jonathan E. Shaw, MD, MRCP (U.K.), FRACP 
Emily K. Sims, MD 
Kristina M. Utzschneider, MD 
Adrian Vella, MD, FRCP (Edin) 
Cuilin Zhang, MD, MPH, PhD  
EDITORIAL BOARD 
David Aguilar, MD 
Mohammed K. Ali, MD, MSc, MBA 
Fida Bacha, MD 
Harpreet Bajaj, MD, MPH, FACE 
A. Sidney Barritt IV, MD, MSCR, FACG, FAASLD 
Rita Basu, MD 
Tadej Battelino, MD, PhD 
Fiona Bragg, MBChB, MRCP, DPhil, FFPH 
Sonia Caprio, MD 
April Carson, PhD, MSPH 
Ranee Chatterjee, MD, MPH 
Mark Emmanuel Cooper, MB BS, PhD 
Matthew J. Crowley, MD, MHS 
Ian de Boer, MD, MS 
J. Hans DeVries, MD, PhD 
Alessandro Doria, MD, PhD, MPH 
Denice Feig, MD, MSc, FRCPC 
Hermes J. Florez, MD, PhD, MPH 
Juan Pablo Frias, MD 
Emily J. Gallagher, MB BCh BAO, MRCPI, PhD 
Ahmad Haidar, PhD 
Michael J. Haller, MD 
Jessica Lee Harding, PhD 
Stewart B. Harris, CM, MD, MPH, FCFP, FACPM 
Marie-France Hivert, MD, MMSc 
Allyson Hughes, PhD  
Silvio E. Inzucchi, MD 
Linong Ji, MD 
Anna Kahkoska, MD, PhD 
Alice Pik Shan Kong, MD 
Kamlesh Khunti, MD 
Britta Larson, PhD  
Richard David Graham Leslie, MD, FRCP, FAoP 
Ildiko Lingvay, MD, MPH, MSCS 
Andrea Luk, MD 
Viswanathan Mohan, MD, PhD, DSc, FACE, MACP 
Helen R. Murphy, MBBChBAO, FRACP, MD 
Michael A. Nauck, MD 
Matthew J. O’Brien, MD, MSc 
Katherine Ogurtsova, PhD 
Neha J. Pagidipati, MD, MPH 
Elisabetta Patorno, DrPH, MD 
Monica E. Peek, MD, MPH, MS 
Frederik Persson, MD, DMSc 
Richard E. Pratley, MD 
David Preiss, PhD, FRCPath, MRCP 
Jonathan Q. Purnell, MD, FTOS 
Qibin Qi, PhD 
Maria J. Redondo, MD, PhD, MPH 
Ravi Retnakaran, MD, MSc 
Peter Rossing, MD, DMSc 
Archana R. Sadhu, MD, FACE  
Desmond Schatz, MD 
Guntram Schernthaner, MD 
Brian M. Schmidt, DPM 
Christina M. Scifres, MD 
Viral Shah, MD 
Jennifer Sherr, MD, PhD 
Jung-Im Shin, MD, PhD 
David Simmons, MA (Cantab), MB BS, FRCP, 
FRACP, MD (Cantab) 
Cate Speake, PhD 
Til Sturmer, MD, MPH, PhD 
Samy Suissa, PhD 
Keiichi Sumida, MD, MPH, PhD, FASN 
Sathish Thirunavukkarasu, MBBS, MPH, PhD 
Eva Tseng, MD, MPH 
Kohjiro Ueki, MD, PhD 
Daniel van Raalte, MD, PhD 
Eva Vivian, PharmD, MS, PhD, CDCES, BC-ADM 
Elizabeth Vrany, PhD 
Pandora L. Wander, MD, MS, FACP 
Deborah J. Wexler, MD, MSc 
Joseph Wolfsdorf, MB, BCh 
Geng Zong, PhD   
The mission of the American Diabetes Association 
is to prevent and cure diabetes and to improve 
the lives of all people affected by diabetes. 
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Diabetes Care is a journal for the health care practitioner that is intended to 
increase knowledge, stimulate research, and promote better management of people 
with diabetes. To achieve these goals, the journal publishes original research on 
human studies in the following categories: Clinical Care/Education/Nutrition/ 
Psychosocial Research, Epidemiology/Health Services Research, Emerging 
Technologies and Therapeutics, Pathophysiology/Complications, and Cardiovascular 
and Metabolic Risk. The journal also publishes ADA statements, consensus reports, 
clinically relevant review articles, letters to the editor, and health/medical news or points 
of view. Topics covered are of interest to clinically oriented physicians, researchers, 
epidemiologists, psychologists, diabetes educators, and other health professionals.  
More information about the journal can be found online at diabetesjournals.org/care. 
Copyright © 2023 by the American Diabetes Association, Inc. All rights reserved. Printed in the 
USA. Requests for permission to reuse content should be sent to Copyright Clearance Center 
at www.copyright.com or 222 Rosewood Dr., Danvers, MA 01923; phone: (978) 750-8400; fax: 
(978) 646-8600. Requests for permission to translate should be sent to Permissions Editor, 
American Diabetes Association, at permissions@diabetes.org. 
The American Diabetes Association reserves the right to reject any advertisement for  
any reason, which need not be disclosed to the party submitting the advertisement. 
Commercial reprint orders should be directed to Sheridan Content Services,  
(800) 635-7181, ext. 8065. 
Single issues of Diabetes Care can be ordered by calling toll-free (800) 232-3472, 8:30 A.M. 
to 5:00 P.M. EST, Monday through Friday. Outside the United States, call (703) 549-1500. 
Rates: $75 in the United States, $95 in Canada and Mexico, and $125 for all other countries. 
Diabetes Care is available online at diabetesjournals.org/care. Please call the  
numbers listed above, e-mail membership@diabetes.org, or visit the online journal for  
more information about submitting manuscripts, publication charges, ordering reprints, 
subscribing to the journal, becoming an ADA member, advertising, permission to reuse 
content, and the journal’s publication policies. 
Periodicals postage paid at Arlington, VA, and additional mailing offices.  
PRINT ISSN 0149-5992  
ONLINE ISSN 1935-5548  
PRINTED IN THE USA  
AMERICAN DIABETES ASSOCIATION OFFICERS 
CHAIR OF THE BOARD 
Rone Luczynski 
PRESIDENT, MEDICINE & SCIENCE 
Rodica Pop-Busui, MD, PhD 
PRESIDENT, HEALTH CARE & EDUCATION 
Janet Brown-Friday, RN, MSN, MPH 
SECRETARY/TREASURER 
Todd F. Brown, PMP 
CHAIR OF THE BOARD-ELECT 
Rhodes B. Ritenour, JD 
PRESIDENT-ELECT, MEDICINE & SCIENCE 
Mandeep Bajaj, MBBS 
PRESIDENT-ELECT, HEALTH CARE & EDUCATION 
Patti Urbanski, MEd, RD, LD, CDCES 
SECRETARY/TREASURER-ELECT 
James Tai 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
Charles D. Henderson 
CHIEF SCIENTIFIC & MEDICAL OFFICER 
Robert A. Gabbay, MD, PhD  
AMERICAN DIABETES ASSOCIATION PERSONNEL AND CONTACTS 
VICE PRESIDENT & PUBLISHER,  
PROFESSIONAL PUBLICATIONS 
Christian S. Kohler 
MANAGING DIRECTOR,  
PROFESSIONAL PUBLICATIONS 
Heather Norton Blackburn 
ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR, PRODUCTION & DESIGN 
Keang Hok 
DIGITAL PRODUCTION MANAGER 
Amy Moran 
ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR, EDITORIAL 
Theresa M. Cooper 
TECHNICAL EDITOR 
Sandro Vitaglione 
DIRECTOR, PEER REVIEW 
Shannon C. Potts 
MANAGER, PEER REVIEW 
Larissa M. Pouch 
ASSOCIATE MANAGER, PEER REVIEW 
Kayla R. Fulkerson 
MANAGER, EDITORIAL & PRODUCTION 
Meaghan Foley 
SENIOR ADVERTISING MANAGER 
Julie DeVoss Graff 
jgraff@diabetes.org 
(703) 299-5511 
PHARMACEUTICAL & CONSUMER ADVERTISING 
Tina Auletta 
Senior Account Manager 
tauletta@diabetes.org 
PHARMACEUTICAL & DEVICE DIGITAL ADVERTISING 
eHealthcare Solutions 
R.J. Lewis 
President and CEO 
rlewis@ehsmail.com 
(609) 882-8887, ext. 101 
SENIOR MANAGER, BILLING & COLLECTIONS 
Jim Harrington 
jharrington@diabetes.org 
DIRECTOR, MEMBERSHIP/SUBSCRIPTION SERVICES 
Donald Crowl  
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

January 2024 Volume 47, Supplement 1  
S1 
Introduction and Methodology 
S5 
Summary of Revisions   
S11 
1. Improving Care and Promoting Health in  
Populations 
Diabetes and Population Health  
Tailoring Treatment for Social Context 
S20 
2. Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes 
Diagnostic Tests for Diabetes  
Classification  
Type 1 Diabetes  
Prediabetes and Type 2 Diabetes  
Pancreatic Diabetes or Diabetes in the  
Context of Disease of the Exocrine Pancreas  
Posttransplantation Diabetes Mellitus  
Monogenic Diabetes Syndromes  
Gestational Diabetes Mellitus 
S43 
3. Prevention or Delay of Diabetes and Associated 
Comorbidities 
Lifestyle Behavior Change for Diabetes Prevention  
Pharmacologic Interventions  
Prevention of Vascular Disease and Mortality  
Person-Centered Care Goals  
Pharmacologic Interventions to Delay Symptomatic  
Type 1 Diabetes 
S52 
4. Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and  
Assessment of Comorbidities 
Person-Centered Collaborative Care  
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation  
Immunizations  
Assessment of Comorbidities    
S77 
5. Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
to Improve Health Outcomes 
Diabetes Self-management Education and Support  
Medical Nutrition Therapy  
Physical Activity  
Smoking Cessation: Tobacco, E-cigarettes,  
and Cannabis 
Supporting Positive Health Behaviors  
Psychosocial Care   
S111 
6. Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia 
Assessment of Glycemic Status  
Glycemic Goals  
Hypoglycemia Assessment, Prevention, and Treatment 
Intercurrent Illness   
S126 
7. Diabetes Technology 
General Device Principles  
Blood Glucose Monitoring  
Continuous Glucose Monitoring Devices  
Insulin Delivery   
S145 
8. Obesity and Weight Management for the Prevention 
and Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes 
Assessment and Monitoring of the Individual With  
Overweight and Obesity 
Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Behavioral Therapy  
Pharmacotherapy 
Medical Devices for Weight Loss  
Metabolic Surgery 
S158 
9. Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment 
Pharmacologic Therapy for Adults With Type 1 Diabetes 
Surgical Treatment for Type 1 Diabetes  
Pharmacologic Therapy for Adults With Type 2  
Diabetes 
S179 
10. Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management 
The Risk Calculator  
Hypertension/Blood Pressure Control  
Lipid Management  
Statin Treatment  
Antiplatelet Agents  
Cardiovascular Disease  
S219 
11. Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management 
Chronic Kidney Disease  
Epidemiology of Diabetes and Chronic Kidney Disease 
Assessment of Albuminuria and Estimated Glomerular  
Filtration Rate 
Diagnosis of Diabetic Kidney Disease 
Staging of Chronic Kidney Disease 
Acute Kidney Injury 
Surveillance 
Interventions 
Referral to a Nephrologist   
S231 
12. Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care 
Diabetic Retinopathy 
Neuropathy 
Foot Care 
S244 
13. Older Adults 
Neurocognitive Function  
Hypoglycemia  
Treatment Goals  
Lifestyle Management  
Pharmacologic Therapy  
Special Considerations for Older Adults With Type 1  
Diabetes  
Treatment in Skilled Nursing Facilities and  
Nursing Homes  
End-of-Life Care 
S258 
14. Children and Adolescents 
Type 1 Diabetes  
Type 2 Diabetes  
Substance Use in Pediatric Diabetes  
Transition From Pediatric to Adult Care   
S282 
15. Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy 
Diabetes in Pregnancy  
Glycemic Goals in Pregnancy  
Management of Gestational Diabetes Mellitus  
Management of Preexisting Type 1 Diabetes  
and Type 2 Diabetes in Pregnancy  
Preeclampsia and Aspirin  
Pregnancy and Drug Considerations  
Postpartum Care   
S295 
16. Diabetes Care in the Hospital 
Hospital Care Delivery Standards  
Glycemic Goals in Hospitalized Adults  
Glucose Monitoring  
Glucose-Lowering Treatment in Hospitalized  
Patients  
Standards of Care in Diabetes—2024 
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Hypoglycemia  
Medical Nutrition Therapy in the Hospital  
Self-management in the Hospital  
Standards for Special Situations  
Transition From the Hospital to the Ambulatory Setting  
Preventing Admissions and Readmissions        
S307 
17. Diabetes and Advocacy  
Advocacy Statements   
S309 
Disclosures   
S314 
Index  
This issue is freely accessible online at https://diabetesjournals.org/care/issue/47/Supplement_1. 
Keep up with the latest information for Diabetes Care and other ADA titles via Facebook (/ADAPublications) and X (@ADA_Pubs and @DiabetesCareADA).  
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Introduction and Methodology:
Standards of Care in Diabetes—2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S1–S4 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SINT
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
Diabetes is a complex, chronic condition
requiring continuous medical care with
multifactorial risk-reduction strategies be-
yond glycemic management. Ongoing dia-
betes self-management education and
support are critical to empowering people,
preventing acute complications, and re-
ducing the risk of long-term complications.
Signiﬁcant evidence exists that supports a
range of interventions to improve diabetes
outcomes.
The
American
Diabetes
Association
(ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes,” re-
ferred to here as the Standards of Care, is
intended to provide clinicians, researchers,
policy makers, and other interested individ-
uals with the components of diabetes care,
general treatment goals, and tools to eval-
uate the quality of care.
The ADA Professional Practice Commit-
tee (PPC) updates the Standards of Care
annually and strives to include discussion
of emerging clinical considerations in the
text, and as evidence evolves, clinical guid-
ance is added to the recommendations in
the Standards of Care. The Standards of
Care is a “living” document where impor-
tant updates are published online should
the PPC determine that new evidence or
regulatory changes (e.g., drug or technol-
ogy approvals, label changes) merit imme-
diate inclusion. More information on the
“Living Standards” can be found on the
ADA professional website DiabetesPro at
professional.diabetes.org/content-page/
living-standards. The Standards of Care
supersedes all previously published ADA
position statements—and the recommen-
dations therein—on clinical topics within
the purview of the Standards of Care;
while still containing valuable analysis,
ADA position statements should not be
considered the current position of the
ADA. The Standards of Care receives an-
nual review and approval by the ADA
Board of Directors and is reviewed by ADA
staff and clinical leadership.The Standards
of Care also undergoes external peer re-
view annually.
SCOPE OF THE GUIDELINES
The recommendations in the Standards of
Care include screening, diagnostic, and
therapeutic actions that are known or be-
lieved to favorably affect health outcomes
of people with diabetes. They also cover
the prevention, screening, diagnosis, and
management of diabetes-associated com-
plications and comorbidities. The recom-
mendations encompass care throughout
the life span for youth (children aged birth
to 11 years and adolescents aged 12–17
years), adults (aged 18–64 years), and older
adults (aged $65 years).The recommenda-
tions cover the management of type 1 dia-
betes, type 2 diabetes, gestational diabetes
mellitus, and other types of diabetes and/or
hyperglycemic conditions.
The Standards of Care does not provide
comprehensive treatment plans for compli-
cations associated with diabetes, such as di-
abetic retinopathy or diabetic foot ulcers,
but offers guidance on how and when to
screen for diabetes complications, manage-
ment of complications in the primary care
and diabetes care settings, and referral to
specialists as appropriate. Similarly, regard-
ing the psychosocial and behavioral health
factors often associated with diabetes and
that can affect diabetes care, the Standards
of Care provides guidance on how and
when to screen, management in the pri-
mary care and diabetes care settings, and
referral but does not provide comprehen-
sive management plans for conditions that
require specialized care, such as mental
illness.
TARGET AUDIENCE
The target audience for the Standards of
Care includes primary care physicians, en-
docrinologists, nurse practitioners, physi-
cian associates/assistants, pharmacists,
dietitians, diabetes care and education spe-
cialists, and all members of the diabetes
care team. The Standards of Care also pro-
vides guidance to specialists caring for
people with diabetes and its multitude of
complications, such as cardiologists, neph-
rologists, emergency physicians, internists,
pediatricians, psychologists, neurologists,
ophthalmologists, and podiatrists.Addition-
ally, these recommendations help payers,
policy makers, researchers, research fund-
ing organizations, and advocacy groups to
align their policies and resources and de-
liver optimal care for people living with
diabetes.
The “Standards of Care in Diabetes,” formerly called “Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes,” was originally approved in 1988. The most recent full
review and revision was in December 2023.
*A complete list of members of the American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee is provided in this section.
Duality of interest information for each author is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee. Introduction and methodology: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2024.
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S1–S4
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for
proﬁt, and the work is not altered. More information is available at https://www.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
INTRODUCTION AND METHODOLOGY
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
S1
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

The ADA strives to improve and update
the Standards of Care to ensure that clini-
cians, health plans, and policy makers can
continue to rely on it as the most authori-
tative source for current guidelines for
diabetes care. The Standards of Care rec-
ommendations are not intended to pre-
clude clinical judgment. They must be
applied in the context of excellent clinical
care, with adjustments for individual pref-
erences, comorbidities, and other patient
factors. For more detailed information
about the management ofdiabetes, please
refer to Medical Management of Type 1
Diabetes (1) and Medical Management of
Type 2 Diabetes (2).
METHODOLOGY AND PROCEDURE
The Standards of Care includes discussion
of evidence and clinical practice recom-
mendations intended to optimize care for
people with diabetes by assisting health
care professionals and individuals in mak-
ing shared decisions about diabetes care.
The recommendations are informed by a
systematic review of evidence and an as-
sessment of the beneﬁts and risks of al-
ternative care options.
Professional Practice Committee
The PPC of the ADA is responsible for
the Standards of Care. The PPC is an in-
terprofessional expert committee com-
prising physicians, nurse practitioners,
pharmacists, diabetes care and education
specialists, registered dietitian nutritionists,
behavioral health scientists, and others
who have expertise in a range of areas in-
cluding but not limited to adult and pedi-
atric endocrinology, epidemiology, public
health, behavioral health, cardiovascular
risk management, microvascular compli-
cations, nephrology, neurology, ophthal-
mology, podiatry, clinical pharmacology,
preconception and pregnancy care, weight
management and diabetes prevention,
and use of technology in diabetes man-
agement. Appointment to the PPC is
based on excellence in clinical practice
and research, with attention to appropri-
ate representation of members based on
considerations including but not limited
to demographic, geographic, work setting,
or identity characteristics (e.g., gender,
ethnicity, ability level). A PPC chairperson
is appointed by the ADA (currently N.A.E.)
and oversees the committee. For the
2024 Standards of Care, as in previous years,
two representatives from the American
College of Cardiology (ACC) acted as ex-
perts and participated in the development
of Section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and
Risk Management.” ACC reviewed and ap-
proved the section. In addition, and new
to the 2024 Standards of Care, one repre-
sentative from the American Society for
Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR)
and one representative from The Obesity
Society (TOS) acted as external experts
for the “Bone Health” subsection in Sec-
tion 4, “Comprehensive Medical Evaluation
and Assessment of Comorbidities,” and
Section 8, “Obesity and Weight Man-
agement for the Prevention and Treatment
of Type 2 Diabetes,” respectively. Both soci-
eties reviewed and approved the section or
subsection in which they were involved.
Each section of the Standards of Care
is reviewed annually and updated with
the latest evidence-based recommenda-
tions by a PPC member designated as the
section lead as well as subcommittee
members. The subcommittees perform
systematic literature reviews and identify
and summarize the scientiﬁc evidence.
An information specialist with knowledge
and experience in literature searching
(a librarian) is consulted as necessary.
A guideline methodologist (R.R.B. for the
2024 Standards of Care) with expertise
and training in evidence-based medicine
and guideline development methodology
oversees all methodological aspects of
the development of the Standards of
Care and serves as a statistical analyst.
Disclosure and Duality of Interest
Management
All members of the expert panel (the
PPC members and subject matter ex-
perts) and ADA staff are required to
comply with the ADA policy on duality
of interest, which requires disclosure of
any ﬁnancial, intellectual, or other inter-
ests that might be construed as consti-
tuting an actual, potential, or apparent
conﬂict, regardless of relevancy to the
guideline topic. For transparency, ADA
requires full disclosure of all relation-
ships. Full disclosure statements from
all committee members are solicited
and reviewed during the appointment
process. Disclosures are then updated
throughout the guideline development
process (speciﬁcally before the start of
every meeting), and disclosure state-
ments are submitted by every Standards
of Care author upon submission of the
revised Standards of Care section. Members
are required to disclose for a time frame
that includes 1 year prior to initiation of
the committee appointment process until
publication of that year’s Standards of
Care. Potential dualities of interest are
evaluated by a designated review group
and, if necessary, the Legal Affairs Divi-
sion of the ADA. The duality of interest
assessment is based on the relative
weight of the ﬁnancial relationship (i.e.,
the monetary amount) and the relevance
of the relationship (i.e., the degree to
which an independent observer might rea-
sonably interpret an association as related
to the topic or recommendation of consid-
eration). In addition, the ADA adheres to
section 7 of the Council of Medical Spe-
cialty Societies “Code for Interactions with
Companies” (3). The duality of interest re-
view group also ensures the majority of the
PPC and the PPC chair are without poten-
tial conﬂict relevant to the subject area.
Furthermore, the PPC chair is required to
remain unconﬂicted for 1 year after the
publication of the Standards of Care.
Members of the committee who disclose
a potential duality of interest pertinent to
any speciﬁc recommendation are prohib-
ited from participating in discussions
related to those recommendations. No
expert panel members were employees
of any pharmaceutical or medical device
company during the development of
the 2024 Standards of Care. Members
of the PPC, their employers, and their
disclosed potential dualities of interest
are listed in the section “Disclosures:
Standards of Care in Diabetes—2024.”
The ADA funds the development of the
Standards of Care from general reve-
nue and does not use industry support
for this purpose.
Evidence Review
The Standards of Care subcommittee for
each section creates an initial list of rele-
vant clinical questions that is reviewed and
discussed by the expert panel. In consulta-
tion with a systematic review expert, each
subcommittee devises and executes sys-
tematic literature searches. For the 2024
Standards of Care, PubMed, Medline, and
EMBASE were searched for the time peri-
ods of 1 June 2022 to 21 July 2023.
Searches are limited to studies published
in English. Subcommittee members also
manually search journals, reference lists
of conference proceedings, and regulatory
agency websites. All potentially relevant
S2
Introduction and Methodology
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

citations are then subjected to a full-text
review. In consultation with the method-
ologist, the subcommittees prepare the
evidence summaries and grading for each
section of the Standards of Care. All PPC
members discuss and review the evidence
summaries and make revisions as appro-
priate. The ﬁnal evidence summaries are
then deliberated on by the PPC, and the
recommendations that will appear in the
Standards of Care are drafted.
Grading of Evidence and
Recommendation Development
A grading system (Table 1) developed
by the ADA and modeled after existing
methods is used to clarify and codify the
evidence that forms the basis for the rec-
ommendations in the Standards of Care.
All of the recommendations in the Stand-
ards of Care are critical to comprehensive
care regardless of rating. ADA recommen-
dations are assigned ratings of A, B, or C,
depending on the quality of the evidence
in support of the recommendation. Ex-
pert opinion E is a separate category for
recommendations in which there is no
evidence from clinical trials, clinical trials
may be impractical, or there is conﬂicting
evidence. Recommendations assigned an
E level of evidence are informed by key
opinion leaders in the ﬁeld of diabetes
(members of the PPC) and cover important
elements of clinical care. All Standards of
Care recommendations receive a rating for
the strength of the evidence and not for
the strength of the recommendation. Rec-
ommendations with A-level evidence are
based on large, well-designed randomized
controlled trials or well-done meta-analyses
of randomized controlled trials. Generally,
these recommendations have the best
chance of improving outcomes when ap-
plied to the population for which they are
appropriate. Recommendations with lower
levels of evidence may be equally impor-
tant but are not as well supported.
Of course, published evidence is only
one component of clinical decision-making.
Clinicians care for people, not populations;
guidelines must always be interpreted with
the individual person in mind. Individual cir-
cumstances, such as comorbid and coexist-
ing diseases, age, education, disability, and,
above all, the values and preferences of the
person with diabetes, must be considered
and may lead to different treatment goals
and strategies. Furthermore, conventional
evidence hierarchies, such as the one
adapted by the ADA, may miss nuances im-
portant in diabetes care. For example, al-
though there is excellent evidence from
clinical trials supporting the importance of
achieving multiple risk factor control, the
optimal way to achieve this result is less
clear. It is difﬁcult to assess each compo-
nent of such a complex intervention.
Evidence to Recommendations
All accumulated evidence was reviewed and
discussed by all PPC members during virtual
meetings and a 2-day in-person meeting in
Arlington,Virginia, in July 2023. Standards of
Care recommendations were updated based
on the newly acquired evidence, and all rec-
ommendations were voted on by the PPC,
with 80% consensus required for any recom-
mendation tobeapproved.
Revision Process
Public comment is particularly important
in the development of clinical practice rec-
ommendations; it promotes transparency
and provides key stake holders the oppor-
tunity to identify and address gaps in care.
The ADA holds a year-long public comment
period requesting feedback on the Stand-
ards of Care. The PPC reviews compiled
feedback from the public in preparation
for the annual update but considers more
pressing updates throughout the year,
which may be published as “living” Stand-
ards updates. Feedback from the larger
clinical community and general public was
invaluable for the revision of the 2023
Standards of Care. Readers who wish to
comment on the 2024 Standards of
Care are invited to do so at professional
.diabetes.org/SOC.
Feedback for the Standards of Care is
also obtained from external peer reviewers.
The Standards of Care is reviewed by ADA
clinical leadership and scientiﬁc and medical
staff and is approved by the ADA Board of
Directors, which includes health care profes-
sionals, scientists, and lay people. The ACC
performs an independent external peer re-
viewandtheACCBoardof Directorsprovides
endorsement of Section 10, “Cardiovascular
Disease and Risk Management.” In addi-
tion, the ASBMR Board of Directors pro-
vides endorsement for the “Bone Health”
subsection of Section 4, “Comprehensive
Medical Evaluation and Assessment of
Comorbidities,” and the TOS Board of Di-
rectors provides endorsement for Section
8, “Obesity and Weight Management for
the Prevention and Treatment of Type 2
Diabetes.”The ADA adheres to the Council
of Medical Specialty Societies revised
“CMSS Principles for the Development of
Specialty Society Clinical Guidelines” (4).
ADA STANDARDS, STATEMENTS,
REPORTS, AND REVIEWS
The ADA has been actively involved in de-
veloping and disseminating diabetes care
Table 1—ADA evidence-grading system for "Standards of Care in Diabetes"
Level of
evidence
Description
A
Clear evidence from well-conducted, generalizable randomized controlled trials
that are adequately powered, including:
 Evidence from a well-conducted multicenter trial
 Evidence from a meta-analysis that incorporated quality ratings in the analysis
Supportive evidence from well-conducted randomized controlled trials
that are adequately powered, including:
 Evidence from a well-conducted trial at one or more institutions
 Evidence from a meta-analysis that incorporated quality ratings in the
analysis
B
Supportive evidence from well-conducted cohort studies, including:
 Evidence from a well-conducted prospective cohort study or registry
 Evidence from a well-conducted meta-analysis of cohort studies
Supportive evidence from a well-conducted case-control study
C
Supportive evidence from poorly controlled or uncontrolled studies, including:
 Evidence from randomized clinical trials with one or more major or three
or more minor methodological ﬂaws that could invalidate the results
 Evidence from observational studies with high potential for bias (such as
case series with comparison with historical controls)
 Evidence from case series or case reports
Conﬂicting evidence with the weight of evidence supporting the recommendation
E
Expert consensus or clinical experience
diabetesjournals.org/care
Introduction and Methodology
S3
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

clinical practice recommendations and re-
lated documents for more than 30 years.
The ADA Standards of Care is an essential
resource for health care professionals car-
ing for people with diabetes. ADA State-
ments, Consensus Reports, and Scientiﬁc
Reviews support the recommendations in-
cluded in the Standards of Care.
Standards of Care
The annual Standards of Care supple-
ment to Diabetes Care contains the ofﬁ-
cial ADA position, is authored by the
ADA, and provides all of the ADA’s cur-
rent clinical practice recommendations.
ADA Statement
An ADA statement is an ofﬁcial ADA point
of view or belief that does not contain
clinical practice recommendations and
may be issued on advocacy, policy, eco-
nomic, or medical issues related to diabe-
tes. ADA statements undergo a formal
review process, including external peer re-
view and review by the appropriate ADA
national committee, ADA clinical leader-
ship, science and health care staff, and, as
warranted, the ADA Board of Directors.
Consensus Report
A consensus report on a particular topic
contains a comprehensive examination, is
authored by an expert panel (i.e., consen-
sus panel), and represents the panel’s col-
lective analysis, evaluation, and opinion.
The need for a consensus report arises
when clinicians, scientists, regulators, and/
or policy makers desire guidance and/or
clarity on a medical or scientiﬁc issue re-
lated to diabetes for which the evidence is
contradictory, emerging, or incomplete.
Consensus reports may also highlight evi-
dence gaps and propose future research
areas to address these gaps. A consensus
report is not an ADA position but repre-
sents expert opinion only and is produced
under the auspices of the ADA by invited
experts. A consensus report may be devel-
oped after an ADA Clinical Conference or
Research Symposium. Consensus reports
undergo a formal review process, including
external peer review and review by the ap-
propriate ADA national committee, ADA
clinical leadership, and the science and
health care staff.
Scientific Review
A scientiﬁc review is a balanced review
and analysis of the literature on a scientiﬁc
or medical topic related to diabetes. A sci-
entiﬁc review is not an ADA position and
does not contain clinical practice recom-
mendations but is produced under the
auspices of the ADA by invited experts.
The scientiﬁc review may provide a scien-
tiﬁc rationale for clinical practice recom-
mendations in the Standards of Care. The
category may also include task force and
expert committee reports.
Members of the PPC
Nuha Ali ElSayed, MD, MMSc (Chair)
Grazia Aleppo, MD
Raveendhara R. Bannuru, MD, PhD (Chief
Methodologist)
Dennis Bruemmer, MD, PhD
Billy S. Collins, DHSc
Laya Ekhlaspour, MD
Marisa E. Hilliard, PhD
Eric L. Johnson, MD
Kamlesh Khunti, MD, PhD
Ildiko Lingvay, MD, MPH
Glenn Matﬁn, MB ChB, MSc (Oxon)
Rozalina G. McCoy, MD, MS
Mary Lou Perry, MS, RDN
Scott J. Pilla, MD, MHS
Sarit Polsky, MD, MPH
Priya Prahalad, MD, PhD
Richard E. Pratley, MD
Alissa R. Segal, PharmD, CDE
Jane Jeffrie Seley, DNP, MPH
Robert C. Stanton, MD
Robert A. Gabbay, MD, PhD
Designated Subject Matter Experts
Elizabeth A. Beverly, PhD (Section 5)
Kenneth Cusi, MD, FACP (Section 4)
Audrey Darville, PhD, APRN (Section 5)
Sandeep R. Das, MD, MPH (Section 10, ACC
representative)
Talya K. Fleming, MD (Section 4)
Jason L. Gaglia, MD, MMSc (Sections 2, 3, and 9)
Rodolfo J. Galindo, MD, FACE (Section 16)
Christopher H. Gibbons, MD, MMSc (Section 12)
John M. Giurini, DPM (Section 12)
Mohamed Hassanein, MD (Section 5)
Mikhail N. Kosiborod, MD, FACC (Section 10,
ACC representative)
Robert F. Kushner, MD (Section 8, TOS
representative)
Lisa Murdock (Section 17)
Nicola Napoli, MD, PhD (Section 4, ASBMR
representative)
Elizabeth Selvin, PhD, MPH (Sections 2 and 3)
Paolo S. Silva, MD (Section 12)
Monica Verduzco-Gutierrez, MD (Section 4)
Crystal C. Woodward (Section 17)
Zobair M. Younossi, MD, MPH (Section 4)
ADA Staff
Raveendhara R. Bannuru, MD, PhD
(corresponding author, rbannuru@diabetes.org)
Nuha Ali ElSayed, MD, MMSc
Robert A. Gabbay, MD, PhD
Elizabeth J. Pekas, PhD
Alexandra M. Yacoubian
Acknowledgments
The ADA thanks the following external peer
reviewers:
Martin Abrahamson, MD
Shivani Agarwal, MD, MPH
Mohammed K. Ali, MD, MSc
G. Todd Alonso, MD
Caroline M. Apovian, MD, FACP
Joan K. Bardsley, MBA, RN
Ian H. de Boer, MD, MS
Florence M. Brown, MD
Brian C. Callaghan, MD, MS
Patrick M. Catalano, MD
Blake A. Cooper, MD, MPH
Ralph A. DeFronzo, MD
Ketan Dhatariya, MD, PhD
Justin B. Echouffo Tcheugui, MD, PhD
Barbara Eichorst, MS, RD
Robert Frykberg, DPM, MPH
Om Ganda, MD
Thomas W. Gardner, MD, MS
Rajesh K. Garg, MD
Sylvia Kehlenbrink, MD
Romesh K. Khardori, MD, PhD
David C. Klonoff, MD
Sarah K. Lyons, MD
Joshua J. Neumiller, PharmD, CDCES
Naushira Pandya, MD, CMD
Anne L. Peters, MD
Kevin A. Peterson, MD, MPH
Anastassios G. Pittas, MD, MS
Rita Rastogi Kalyani, MD, MHS
Connie M. Rhee, MD
Alpana Shukla, MD
Kimberly Simmons, MD, MPH
Ruth S. Weinstock, MD, PhD
John F. Zrebiec, MSW
ACC peer reviewers (Section 10):
Branko D. Beleslin, MD, PhD
Kim K. Birtcher, PharmD, MS
Dave L. Dixon, PharmD, FACC
James L. Januzzi, Jr, MD, FACC
Richard J. Kovacs, MD, MACC
The ADA thanks the following individuals for
their support:
Rajvinder K. Gill
Karen Kemmis, PT, DPT
Laura S. Mitchell, BA
References
1. American Diabetes Association. Medical
Management of Type 1 Diabetes. 7th ed. Wang
CC, Shah AC, Eds. Arlington,VA, American Diabetes
Association, 2017
2. American Diabetes Association. Medical
Management of Type 2 Diabetes. 8th ed.
Meneghini L, Ed. Arlington,VA, American Diabetes
Association, 2020
3. Council of Medical Specialty Societies. CMSS
code for interactions with companies. Accessed
16 August 2023. Available from https://cmss.org/
code-for-interactions-with-companies/
4. Council for Medical Specialty Societies. CMSS
principles for the development of specialty
society clinical guidelines. Accessed 16 August
2023.
Available
from
https://cmss.org/
wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Revised-CMSS-
Principles-for-Clinical-Practice-Guideline-Deve-
lopment.pdf
S4
Introduction and Methodology
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Summary of Revisions: Standards
of Care in Diabetes—2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S5–S10 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SREV
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
GENERAL CHANGES
The ﬁeld of diabetes care is rapidly chang-
ing as new research, technology, and treat-
ments that can improve the health and
well-being of people with diabetes con-
tinue to emerge. With annual updates
since 1989, the American Diabetes Associ-
ation (ADA) has long been a leader in pro-
ducing guidelines that capture the most
current state of the ﬁeld.
The 2024 Standards of Care includes
revisions to incorporate person-ﬁrst and
inclusive language. Efforts were made to
consistently apply terminology that em-
powers people with diabetes and rec-
ognizes the individual at the center of
diabetes care.
Although levels of evidence for sev-
eral recommendations have been up-
dated, these changes are not outlined
below where the clinical recommenda-
tion has remained the same. That is,
changes in evidence level from, for ex-
ample, E to C are not noted below. The
2024 Standards of Care contains, in ad-
dition to many minor changes that clarify
recommendations or reﬂect new evidence,
more substantive revisions detailed
below.
SECTION CHANGES
Section 1. Improving Care and
Promoting Health in Populations
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S001)
Recommendation 1.4 was updated to em-
phasize improving processes of care and
health outcomes, costs, individual prefer-
ences and goals, and treatment burden.
The subsection “Status and Demo-
graphics of Diabetes Care,” formerly “Care
Delivery Systems,” was updated to include
current data with respect to cholesterol,
blood pressure, and glycemic management.
The “Cost Considerations for Medication-
Taking Behaviors” subsection now includes
costs of insulin and glucose monitoring
devices, with an update on insulin price
lowering.
Language was added to the “Home-
lessness and Housing Insecurity” subsec-
tion to reﬂect issues more accurately in
this population.
The “Social Capital and Community
Support” subsection now discusses the
possible role of community paramedics
in community-based diabetes care.
Section 2. Diagnosis and
Classification of Diabetes
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S002)
The title of Section 2 was changed to
“Diagnosis and Classiﬁcation of Diabetes” to
better represent real-world clinical practice
(i.e., diagnosis occurs before classiﬁcation).
Recommendation 2.1a was added to
emphasize the structured approach to di-
agnostic testing, and Recommendation
2.1b was updated to highlight the impor-
tance of conﬁrmatory testing when an ab-
normal test result is identiﬁed.
Tables 2.1 and 2.2 were modiﬁed to
include A1C at the top of the testing
hierarchy to acknowledge real-world prac-
tice when diagnosing diabetes and predia-
betes, respectively.
Recommendation 2.5 was added to
emphasize the importance of differenti-
ating which form of diabetes an individ-
ual has in order to facilitate personalized
management.
Figure 2.1 was added as a new ﬁgure
to provide a structured framework for in-
vestigation of suspected type 1 diabetes
in newly diagnosed adults.
The “Type 1 Diabetes” subsection was
updated to reﬁne diagnostic criteria for
type 1 diabetes based on recent U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) approval
of a new drug to delay the incidence of
type 1 diabetes. Recommendations 2.6
and 2.7, for type 1 diabetes, were up-
dated accordingly.
Recommendation 2.8 was added for
consideration of standardized islet auto-
antibody tests for classiﬁcation of diabe-
tes in adults who phenotypically overlap
with type 1 diabetes, and a new para-
graph was added to highlight the possible
association between coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) infection and new-onset
type 1 diabetes.
Recommendation 2.15a was added to
emphasize the role of several medication
classes in increasing the risk of prediabe-
tes and type 2 diabetes and the need for
screening.
Recommendation 2.15b was added to
provide screening guidance for prediabetes
*A complete list of members of the American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee. Summary of revisions: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2024. Diabetes
Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S5–S10
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not
for proﬁt, and the work is not altered. More information is available at https://www.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
SUMMARY OF REVISIONS
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
S5
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

and type 2 diabetes in individuals treated with
second-generation antipsychotic medications.
In the “Pancreatic Diabetes or Diabetes in
the Context of Disease of the Exocrine
Pancreas” subsection, Recommendation
2.17 was added to highlight the impor-
tance of screening for diabetes in people
following an episode of acute pancreatitis
or in individuals with chronic pancreatitis.
In addition, the discussion on cystic
ﬁbrosis–related diabetes (CFRD) was in-
corporated into this subsection. Recom-
mendation 2.19 was modiﬁed to clarify
that while A1C is not recommended as a
screening test for CFRD due to low sensi-
tivity, it is widely used in clinical practice,
and a value of $6.5% ($48 mmol/mol) is
consistent with a diagnosis of CFRD.
Section 3. Prevention or Delay of
Diabetes and Associated
Comorbidities
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S003)
Recommendation 3.2 was added to state
the importance of monitoring individuals
at risk for developing type 1 diabetes, as
a younger age of seroconversion (partic-
ularly under age 3 years), the number of
diabetes-related autoantibodies identi-
ﬁed, and the development of autoanti-
bodies against islet antigen 2 (IA-2) have
all been associated with more rapid pro-
gression to clinical type 1 diabetes.
Recommendation 3.15 was added to
address use of teplizumab, which was
approved to delay the onset of stage 3
type 1 diabetes in adults and pediatric
individuals (aged 8 years and older) with
stage 2 type 1 diabetes.
Section 4. Comprehensive Medical
Evaluation and Assessment of
Comorbidities
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S004)
In Recommendation 4.1, language was
modiﬁed to be more inclusive for com-
prehensive medical evaluation.
Figure 4.1 was updated to include in-
dividual lifestyle choices when choosing
treatment, and Table 4.1 was modiﬁed to
include changes made throughout Section 4.
Changes were made in the “Immuni-
zations” subsection to reﬂect the COVID-19
post-pandemic period, and updates were
made regarding the respiratory syncytial
virus vaccine in adults $60 years of age
with chronic conditions such as diabetes.
Table 4.4, formerly Table 4.5, was re-
vised to include these important vaccina-
tion updates.
The subsection on "Bone Health" has
been extensively revised and updated
to reﬂect the current best practices in
the ﬁeld. Recommendations 4.9–4.14
were added to include regular evalua-
tion and treatment for bone health, and
accompanying text was expanded to re-
ﬂect these updates. Table 4.5 was added
to include general and diabetes-speciﬁc
risk factors for fracture.
Recommendation 4.22 was added to
include assessment and referral to appro-
priate health care professionals who spe-
cialize in disability management, which
was expanded upon in the text.
Major changes regarding liver dis-
ease in people with diabetes were pre-
viously added as a 2023 Living Standards
update, with extensive recommendations
for screening and management to be in
alignment with other professional socie-
ties. In addition, the recently proposed
changes in the nomenclature proposed
for steatotic liver disease is discussed. The
terminology for nonalcoholic fatty liver dis-
ease and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis was
maintained at this time.
The “Bone Health” subsection is en-
dorsed by the American Society for Bone
and Mineral Research.
Section 5. Facilitating Positive Health
Behaviors and Well-being to Improve
Health Outcomes
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S005)
The recommendations and text of Sec-
tion 5 were adjusted to place focus on
guiding the behavior of health care pro-
fessionals rather than people with dia-
betes, thus aligning with the purpose of
the Standards of Care as guidance for
health care professionals.
Recommendation 5.4 was updated
to include a broader integration of cul-
tural sensitivity in the context of person-
centered care.
Recommendation 5.5 reﬂects inclusion
of telehealth and digital interventions for
DSMES.
The “Diabetes Self-Management Edu-
cation and Support” subsection text was
updated to reﬂect changes in DSMES re-
imbursement policies and the importance
of addressing barriers to using DSMES
services.
Recommendation 5.13 was added to
the “Medical Nutrition Therapy” subsec-
tion to incorporate inclusive food-based
eating patterns with key nutrition princi-
ples that are foundational to all people
with diabetes, and Recommendation 5.20
was updated to emphasize including
healthy fats within the context of a Med-
iterranean style of eating.
A subsection on religious fasting was
added, and the concept of chrononutrition
(impact of eating on circadian rhythms)
was introduced.
Recommendation 5.23 was updated
to include advising alcohol abstainers to
not begin use of alcohol for the purpose
of improving health outcomes.
The text on nonnutritive sweeteners
was expanded to address the World Health
Organization’s conditional recommendation
on their use and safety.
In the “Physical Activity” subsection,
Recommendation 5.31 was updated to
deﬁne sedentary behavior and to be in-
clusive of all types of diabetes. The text of
this subsection was updated to include a
discussion of the application and beneﬁts
of high-intensity interval training.
The subsection “Smoking Cessation:
Tobacco, E-cigarettes, and Cannabis” was
updated to include cannabis. Although
not enough data are available to support
a new recommendation, the text of this
subsection was revised to include a dis-
cussion on cannabis use. In addition, Rec-
ommendation 5.33 was updated to advise
that clinicians ask people with diabetes
about use of cigarettes or other tobacco
products and make appropriate referrals
for cessation as a routine component of
diabetes care and education.
Recommendation 5.36 in the “Psycho-
social Care” subsection was updated to
provide greater detail for psychosocial
screening protocols, including diabetes-
related mood concerns, stress, and quality
of life.
Recommendation 5.39 was changed to
specify the frequency for diabetes distress
screening and to highlight the role of
health care professionals in addressing dia-
betes distress. The accompanying text also
includes links to validated measures of dia-
betes distress.
Recommendation 5.40 has been up-
dated to include screening for fear of
hypoglycemia.
Recommendation 5.41 has been up-
dated to reﬂect increased frequency for
depression screening and monitoring in
people with a history of depression.
In the “Sleep Health” subsection, Rec-
ommendation
5.51
was
added
to
S6
Summary of Revisions
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

recommend practicing sleep-promoting
routines and habits.
Section 6. Glycemic Goals and
Hypoglycemia
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S006)
The title of Section 6 was changed to
“Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia,” and
hypoglycemia content throughout the
Standards of Care was consolidated into
this section.
Recommendation 6.1 was updated to
include more frequent glycemic assess-
ment for populations needing closer gly-
cemic monitoring.
The “Glycemic Assessment by A1C”
subsection was revised to reﬂect recent
data on the strengths and limitations of the
A1C assay and to include a discussion of
the beneﬁts and limitations of serum gly-
cated protein assays as alternatives to A1C.
Table 6.2 was updated to outline CGM
metrics and recommended glycemic goals.
The subsections “Glucose Lowering and
Microvascular Complications” and “Glucose
Lowering
and
Cardiovascular
Disease
Outcomes” were updated to include evi-
dence on long-term follow-up of clinical
trials of tight glycemic management and
to put these ﬁndings into the context of
newer diabetes medications with cardio-
vascular and renal beneﬁts.
Recommendations 6.8a and 6.8b were
added to clarify the clinical scenarios
where deintensifying diabetes medications
is appropriate, and text in the “Setting
and Modifying Glycemic Goals” subsec-
tion was added to discuss the rationale
for this update.
Recommendations 6.11a, 6.11b, and
6.11c were added to clarify when and
how health care professionals should re-
view an individual’s hypoglycemia history,
awareness, and risk. Table 6.5, which pro-
vides a summary of hypoglycemia risk
factors (formerly in Section 4), was up-
dated to reﬂect recent evidence. The
“Hypoglycemia Risk Assessment” sub-
section was added to provide the back-
ground and rationale for Table 6.5.
Several recommendations were added to
and updated within the “Hypoglycemia As-
sessment, Prevention, and Treatment” sub-
section. Recommendation 6.11d was added
to highlight the beneﬁts of continuous glu-
cose monitoring (CGM) use for hypoglyce-
mia prevention. Recommendation 6.12 was
revised to provide hypoglycemia treatment
guidance inclusive of individuals using auto-
mated insulin delivery (AID) systems, and
details were added to the text. Recommen-
dation 6.13 was revised to clarify criteria for
prescribing glucagon and express preference
for glucagon preparations that do not have
to be reconstituted. Table 6.6 was added
to summarize currently available glucagon
products and their monthly costs. Recom-
mendation 6.14 was added to address the
need for patient education for hypoglyce-
mia prevention and treatment, especially
for insulin users. Recommendations 6.15
and 6.16 were updated to communicate
how hypoglycemic events should inform
modiﬁcation of the diabetes treatment
plan and to direct clinicians to use evi-
dence-based interventions to reestablish
awareness of hypoglycemia, respectively.
Table 6.7 was added to summarize
the components of hypoglycemia preven-
tion and their recommended frequency.
Section 7. Diabetes Technology
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S007)
Recommendation 7.1 was added to state
that people with diabetes should be of-
fered any type of diabetes device (e.g., in-
sulin pens, connected pens, glucose
meters, and CGM or AID systems), and
Recommendation 7.2 was added to em-
phasize the need to start CGM early in
type 1 diabetes, even at diagnosis, to pro-
mote early achievement of glycemic goals.
Recommendation 7.3 was added to
emphasize that health care professionals
should acquire sufﬁcient knowledge for
the use and application of diabetes tech-
nology for people with diabetes, and the
text has been expanded to discuss the
need for both knowledge and compe-
tency for interprofessional teams manag-
ing diabetes care.
Recommendation 7.8 was modiﬁed
to align with Section 14, “Children and
Adolescents,” to support initiation of an
insulin pump and/or AID system early for
individuals with type 1 diabetes, even at
diagnosis.
Recommendation 7.15 was updated to re-
ﬂect the beneﬁts of intermittently scanned
CGM in less intensively treated people with
type 2 diabetes.
The text on CGM systems was expanded
to include updates on systems that are
cleared for integration with AID systems
and to include the beneﬁts of CGM use in
type 2 diabetes for those using noninten-
sive insulin therapy and/or not using insulin
therapy. In addition, the text was updated
to include suggestions to streamline the
approach to CGM interpretation by various
methods, such as assessing data sufﬁciency
and reviewing glycemic trends to modify
therapeutic approaches.
The text on real-time CGM was up-
dated to outline the systems that can be
used by pregnant individuals with diabe-
tes, and substances that interfere with
CGM device accuracy were updated in the
text and in Table 7.4.
Recommendation 7.24 was reﬁned to
emphasize the usefulness of insulin pens
or insulin injection aids for people with
dexterity issues or vision impairment.
The text on AID systems was updated
to include beneﬁts reported from real-
world studies.
Recommendation 7.33 was added to
emphasize continuation of personal CGM
use in hospitalized individuals with diabetes
when clinically appropriate in a hybrid fash-
ion and under an institutional protocol.
Section 8. Obesity and Weight
Management for the Prevention and
Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S008)
Language throughout the section was
amended to be person centered and to
emphasize the importance of weight man-
agement within the overall context of the
treatment of people with diabetes, and
the justiﬁcation for a weight-based ap-
proach to diabetes treatment has been ex-
panded. The recommendations and text
pertaining to weight management treat-
ment have been expanded to acknowl-
edge the expected range of beneﬁts
across the spectrum of weight loss.
Recommendations 8.2a, 8.2b, and 8.3
were expanded to incorporate additional
anthropometric measurements beyond BMI
(i.e., waist circumference, waist-to-hip ratio,
and/or waist-to-height ratio) to encourage
individualized assessments of body fat mass
and distribution.
Recommendation 8.6 was added to
highlight that approaches to treating obe-
sity should be individualized and that any of
the established approaches (i.e., intensive
behavioral interventions, pharmacologic
treatment, or metabolic surgery) can be
considered in people with obesity and dia-
betes alone or in combination.
Recommendation 8.8b was updated
to suggest counseling strategies to ad-
dress barriers to access.
Recommendations 8.11a and 8.11b
were updated to highlight the effective-
ness of weight maintenance programs
diabetesjournals.org/care
Summary of Revisions
S7
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

and to suggest monitoring weight loss
progress while providing ongoing sup-
port for maintaining goals long term.
Recommendation 8.17 was added to
include glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) re-
ceptor agonists or a dual glucose-dependent
insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) and GLP-1
receptor agonist with greater weight loss
efﬁcacy as preferred pharmacotherapy
for obesity management in people with
diabetes.
Recommendation 8.18 was added to
address the importance of reevaluation
for obesity treatment intensiﬁcation or
deintensiﬁcation for people with diabe-
tes to reach their weight goals.
The text of the “Metabolic Surgery”
subsection was updated to emphasize
preventing and addressing therapeutic
inertia pertaining to weight manage-
ment goals in people with obesity and
type 2 diabetes.
Recommendation 8.19 was updated
in response to growing evidence of the
long-term beneﬁts of metabolic surgery
treatment in people with obesity and
type 2 diabetes.
Recommendation 8.20 now includes
a link to accredited metabolic and bar-
iatric surgery centers.
Recommendation 8.25 was added to
emphasize the importance of monitor-
ing weight loss progress of individuals
who have undergone metabolic surgery.
In the case of inadequate progress, po-
tential barriers and additional weight
loss interventions should be considered.
Table 8.1 was updated to include the
recent FDA approvals and price changes
for several obesity pharmacotherapies.
This section is endorsed by The Obe-
sity Society.
Section 9. Pharmacologic
Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S009)
Recommendation 9.2 was updated to
reﬂect preference of insulin analogs or
inhaled insulin over injectable human
insulins to minimize hypoglycemia risk
for most adults with type 1 diabetes.
Recommendation 9.3 was added to
include early use of CGM for adults with
type 1 diabetes, and Recommendation
9.4 was added to indicate consideration for
use of AID systems for adults with type 1
diabetes.
Recommendation 9.5 was expanded
to include educating adults with type 1
diabetes on how to modify their insulin
dose based on concurrent glycemia, gly-
cemic trends, and sick day management.
Recommendation 9.6 was added to
suggest prescribing glucagon for indi-
viduals taking insulin or at high risk for
hypoglycemia.
Recommendation 9.7 was added to
emphasize the importance of regular
treatment plan evaluation for individu-
als with diabetes to ensure individual-
ized goals are met.
Recommendation 9.14 was updated
to highlight the importance of early
combination therapy when shortening
the time to attainment of individualized
treatment goals for adults with type 2
diabetes.
Recommendation 9.15 was added to
reﬂect that pharmacologic therapies should
address both individualized glycemic and
weight goals in adults with type 2 diabetes
without cardiovascular and/or kidney
disease.
Recommendation 9.16 was added to
advise consideration of additional glucose-
lowering agents for adults with type 2 dia-
betes not meeting their individualized gly-
cemic goals.
Recommendation 9.17 was added to
highlight the importance of treatment
intensiﬁcation and combination of ap-
proaches pertaining to weight manage-
ment and their alignment with glycemic
management goals for adults with type 2
diabetes.
Recommendation 9.18 was updated to
reﬂect prioritizing glycemic management
agents that also reduce cardiovascular and
kidney disease risk in adults with type 2
diabetes and established/high risk of ath-
erosclerotic cardiovascular disease, heart
failure, and/or chronic kidney disease.
For adults with type 2 diabetes who
have heart failure, Recommendation
9.19 was added to recommend sodium–
glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibi-
tors for glycemic management and pre-
vention of heart failure hospitalizations.
Recommendations 9.20 and 9.21 were
added to reﬂect individualized recommen-
dations for individuals with type 2 diabe-
tes and chronic kidney disease.
Recommendation 9.22 was updated
to reﬂect that insulin therapy should be
considered at any stage irrespective of
other glucose-lowering medications in
certain circumstances.
Recommendation 9.23 was updated
to include a dual GIP and GLP-1 receptor
agonist as an additional option for greater
glycemic management that is preferred
to insulin, and Recommendation 9.24 was
updated to reﬂect reassessing insulin dos-
ing upon addition or dose escalation of a
GLP-1 receptor agonist or a dual GIP and
GLP-1 receptor agonist.
Recommendation 9.25 was broadened
to include any glucose-lowering agents
if justiﬁed for additional beneﬁts (e.g.,
weight management, cardiometabolic,
or kidney beneﬁts) to treatment goals.
Recommendation 9.26 was added to
suggest reassessing the need and/or dos-
ages for other glucose-lowering agents
that are associated with higher risk of hy-
poglycemia when initiating or intensifying
insulin treatment.
Recommendations 9.28 and 9.29 were
added to provide guiding principles of
care for people with obstacles that may
impede their diabetes management.
Figure 9.1 was updated to reﬂect a
terminology change from “hybrid closed-
loop technology” to “automated insulin
delivery systems.”
Table 9.1 was updated to reﬂect ter-
minology updates, and Table 9.2 was up-
dated to include counseling people with
diabetes about potential for ileus (subcu-
taneous semaglutide) and to include that
dual GIP and GLP-1 receptor agonist treat-
ment is not recommended for individuals
with a history of gastroparesis.
Tables 9.3 and 9.4 were updated to
reﬂect changes in cost for several agents.
Section 10. Cardiovascular Disease
and Risk Management
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S010)
Recommendation 10.12 was revised to
recommend monitoring of serum creati-
nine/estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate
and potassium within 7–14 days after ini-
tiation of treatment with an ACE inhibitor,
angiotensin receptor blocker, mineralocor-
ticoid receptor agonist, or diuretic.
Recommendation 10.24 was added to
include bempedoic acid treatment for
people with diabetes and without estab-
lished cardiovascular disease who are in-
tolerant to statin therapy. In addition,
Recommendation 10.28b recommends
bempedoic acid or proprotein conver-
tase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9)
inhibitor therapy with monoclonal anti-
body treatment or inclisiran siRNA as al-
ternative cholesterol-lowering therapy.
A new subsection, “Intolerance to Statin
Therapy,” was added to expand on these
updates.
S8
Summary of Revisions
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Recommendation 10.35b has been
modiﬁed to recommend an interprofes-
sional team approach that includes a
cardiovascular or neurological specialist
to decide on the length of treatment
with dual antiplatelet therapy in peo-
ple with diabetes after an acute coronary
syndrome or ischemic stroke/transient is-
chemic attack.
Recommendations 10.39a and 10.39b
were added to include screening of adults
with diabetes for asymptomatic heart fail-
ure by measuring a natriuretic peptide
level to facilitate the prevention or progres-
sion to symptomatic stages of heart failure.
Recommendation 10.40 was modiﬁed
to include screening for peripheral artery
disease with ankle-brachial index testing
in asymptomatic people with diabetes
aged $50 years , microvascular disease in
any location, foot complications, or any
end-organ damage from diabetes. Periph-
eral artery disease screening should be
considered for individuals with diabetes
for $10 years or more.
Recommendation 10.42a was updated
to recommend either an SGLT2 inhibitor
or an SGLT1/2 inhibitor for people with di-
abetes and established heart failure with
preserved or reduced ejection fraction to
reduce risk of worsening heart failure and
cardiovascular death. Additional text in-
cludes a discussion on cardiovascular out-
comes trials of the SGLT1/2 inhibitor
sotagliﬂozin.
Recommendations 10.45a–10.45e have
been added to address treatment ap-
proaches for people with diabetes and
heart failure, including the roles of an in-
terprofessional team and pharmacological
approaches to prevent heart failure pro-
gression and hospitalization.
Recommendation 10.47 was added to
suggest including education on risks and
signs of ketoacidosis and methods of man-
agement and tools for testing in people
with type 1 diabetes, ketosis-prone type 2
diabetes, and/or those consuming keto-
genic diets treated with SGLT inhibition.
Figure 10.2 was modiﬁed to reﬂect
changes in initial blood pressure values
and treatment recommendations for
conﬁrmed hypertension in nonpregnant
people with diabetes.
This section is endorsed by the Amer-
ican College of Cardiology.
Section 11. Chronic Kidney Disease
and Risk Management
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S011)
Section 11 was updated to align with
the latest consensus report on diabetes
management in chronic kidney disease
by the ADA and Kidney Disease: Improv-
ing Global Outcomes (KDIGO).
Recommendation 11.4a was updated
to include the role of ACE inhibitors or an-
giotensin receptor blockers in preventing
the progression of kidney disease and re-
ducing cardiovascular events.
Recommendation 11.7 was updated
to reﬂect dietary protein intake levels for
individuals with stage 3 or higher chronic
kidney disease who are currently treated
with dialysis.
Figure 11.1 was updated and illustrates
chronic kidney disease progression, fre-
quency of visits, and referral to nephrol-
ogy according to glomerular ﬁltration rate
and albuminuria. Figure 11.2 was added
to present a holistic approach for improv-
ing outcomes in individuals with diabetes
and chronic kidney disease.
Section 12. Retinopathy, Neuropathy,
and Foot Care
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S012)
Language in Recommendations 12.1, 12.2,
12.5, and 12.7 was reﬁned to be more ac-
tionable by health care professionals.
Recommendation 12.6 was updated to
indicate the application of FDA-approved
artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms, and the
text was updated with approved artiﬁcial
intelligence algorithm details and clinical
trials.
Recommendations 12.15 and 12.16 were
added to address vision loss from diabetes,
and the text was expanded to discuss com-
plications of vision loss and the importance
of evaluation and rehabilitation.
The text in the “Neuropathy” subsec-
tion was updated to discuss the limited
data available to support use of lidocaine
5% plaster/patch and gastric stimulation
as efﬁcacious therapies for people with
diabetes.
In the "Foot Care" subsection, Rec-
ommendation 12.27 was updated to in-
clude toe pressures when screening for
peripheral artery disease. In addition,
Recommendation 12.28 was amended
to include the importance of an inter-
professional approach facilitated by a
podiatrist with other appropriate team
members for individuals who have foot
ulcers and high-risk feet (e.g., individu-
als on dialysis, with Charcot foot, with
prior ulcer or amputation history, or
with peripheral artery disease).
Table 12.2 was updated to include
“Fish skin graft” under “Acellular matrix
tissues” for advanced wound therapies.
Section 13. Older Adults
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S013)
Recommendation 13.6 was modiﬁed to
align with the revised Medicare reim-
bursement rules allowing CGM for adults
with type 2 diabetes on any insulin.
Recommendations 13.8a, 13.8b, and
13.8c were amended to highlight the het-
erogeneity present for treatment goals
for older adults, especially those with in-
termediate or complex health conditions
who need to personalize glycemic goals.
Recommendations 13.16a–13.16d were
updated to highlight the need to dein-
tensify therapy, most particularly hypo-
glycemia-causing medications (such as
insulin, sulfonylureas, and meglitinides).
These recommendations also suggest
switching to classes of glucose-lowering
medications with a lower risk of hypo-
glycemia to meet individualized glycemic
goals. In addition, treatment plans for
older adults with diabetes and other co-
morbidities (e.g., atherosclerotic cardio-
vascular disease, heart failure, and/or
chronic kidney disease) should include
agents that reduce cardiorenal risk, re-
gardless of glycemia.
Section 14. Children and Adolescents
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S014)
Recommendation 14.4 was added to state
the need for insulin dosing adjustments
according to meal composition.
In the “Psychosocial Care” subsection,
Recommendation 14.10 was revised to
include screening details for psychosocial
and behavioral health concerns and for
appropriate referral when indicated, and
Recommendation 14.12 was updated to
clarify diabetes distress and lower en-
gagement in diabetes self-management
behavior.
Recommendation 14.53 was modiﬁed
to state “at least” a 7–10% decrease in
excess weight for youth with overweight
and obesity with type 2 diabetes when
recommending developmentally and
culturally appropriate comprehensive life-
style programs.
Recommendations 14.68 and 14.70
were updated to include consideration
for empagliﬂozin prior to initiating and/or
intensifying insulin therapy plans for
diabetesjournals.org/care
Summary of Revisions
S9
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

glycemic management, and Fig. 14.1 was
updated to include empagliﬂozin.
Recommendation 14.69 was added
to suggest consideration for medication-
taking behavior and the medications’
effects on weight for youth with over-
weight or obesity and type 2 diabetes.
The term “severe obesity” in Recom-
mendation 14.72 was changed to “class 2
obesity or higher (BMI >35 kg/m2 or
120% of 95th percentile for age and sex,
whichever is lower)” to provide greater
details for adolescents being considered
for metabolic surgery.
Recommendation 14.78 was updated
to clarify protein intake according to age
for those with nephropathy.
The new subsection “Substance Use in
Pediatric Diabetes” includes Recommen-
dations 14.106 and 14.107 to discourage
initiation of smoking (tobacco and elec-
tronic cigarettes) and to encourage smok-
ing cessation. The text was expanded
to discuss the adverse health effects of
smoking and exposure to secondhand
smoke for youth with diabetes.
In the “Transition from Pediatric to
Adult Care” subsection, Recommenda-
tions 14.108 and 14.109 were revised
to reﬂect the role of interprofessional
teams in the transition from pediatric
to adult care and to be more person
centered. Recommendation 14.110 was
added to give direction for the coordi-
nation between pediatric diabetes spe-
cialists and youth with diabetes and
their caregivers on the timing of trans-
fer to adult care.
Section 15. Management of Diabetes
in Pregnancy
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S015)
“Reproductive potential” was changed to
“childbearing potential” throughout the
section to be more speciﬁc. “Women”
was changed to “individuals” throughout
the section, except for instances men-
tioning the title of a published study, to
be more inclusive.
In the “Preconception Care” subsection,
Recommendation 15.4 was updated to
highlight the approach of interprofessional
care and the need for inclusion of an en-
docrinology health care professional, and
Recommendation 15.5 was expanded to in-
clude physical activity for preconception care.
In the “Glycemic Goals in Pregnancy”
subsection, Recommendation 15.7 was
modiﬁed to emphasize that all pregnant
individuals with diabetes should monitor
fasting, preprandial, and postprandial blood
glucose levels, and Recommendation 15.10
was updated to include CGM use for preg-
nant individuals with type 1 diabetes.
The text in “Insulin Physiology” was
expanded to include information about
changes to basal and bolus insulin re-
quirements as pregnancy progresses for
individuals with preexisting diabetes.
The text in “Glucose Monitoring” was
updated to differentiate lower limits of
glucose thresholds based on blood and
sensor glucose monitoring.
Language was added to “Continuous
Glucose Monitoring in Pregnancy” to en-
courage individualization for CGM use in
pregnant individuals with type 2 diabetes
or gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM).
Language was also added to clarify the
international consensus on time in range
for pregnant individuals with type 2 dia-
betes or GDM.
Recommendation 15.15 was updated
to clarify that metformin and glyburide,
individually or in combination, should
not be used as ﬁrst-line agents for treat-
ing hyperglycemia in pregnancy.
Language was added to the “Pre-
eclampsia and Aspirin” subsection to
note that individuals with GDM may also
be candidates for aspirin therapy if they
have a single high risk factor or multiple
moderate risk factors.
Recommendation 15.27 was updated to
encourage breastfeeding efforts for all indi-
viduals with diabetes who are postpartum.
The “Postpartum Care” subsection was
updated to explain that a preconception
evaluation is needed for individuals with
childbearing potential who have predia-
betes or a history of GDM.
Section 16. Diabetes Care in the Hospital
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S016)
Recommendation 16.2 was expanded to
emphasize the need for personalized ap-
proaches in the emergency department,
intensive care unit and nonintensive care
unit wards, gynecology-obstetrics/delivery
units, dialysis suites, and psychiatric wards.
The text has been expanded to encourage
institutions to perform regular audits to
monitor proper use of protocols and to
ensure institute educational/training pro-
grams keep staff up to date.
Recommendation 16.4 was updated
to reﬂect that insulin and other therapies
should be initiated or intensiﬁed for
treatment of persistent hyperglycemia
starting at a threshold of 180 mg/dL
(10.0 mmol/L).
Recommendation 16.5a was added to
delineate the glycemic goals for most
critically ill individuals with hyperglycemia
(target glucose range of 140–180 mg/dL
[7.8–10.0 mmol/L]), and Recommen-
dation 16.5b was updated to suggest
more stringent goals (110–140 mg/dL
[6.1–7.8 mmol/L]) for selected critically ill
individuals if these goals can be achieved
without signiﬁcant hypoglycemia.
Recommendations 16.6 and 16.7 were
added to indicate continued use of
personal CGM devices and use of AID sys-
tems in conjunction with CGM, respec-
tively, in the inpatient setting if clinically
appropriate, with conﬁrmatory point-
of-care glucose measurements for insulin
dosing decisions and hypoglycemia assess-
ment, if resources and training are avail-
able, and according to an institutional
protocol. The narrative has also been
expanded to recommend a personal-
ized approach for achieving glycemic
goals throughout the hospital stay.
In the “Perioperative Care” subsec-
tion, a statement was added about the
safe use of GLP-1 receptor agonists in
the perioperative period.
The “Glucose-Lowering Treatment in
Hospitalized Patients” subsection dis-
cusses the evidence on the coadministra-
tion of a low dose of basal insulin analog
while on intravenous insulin infusion.
For the management of diabetic ketoa-
cidosis and hyperglycemic hyperosmolar
state, the text has been expanded to in-
clude a nurse-driven protocol with a vari-
able rate based on glucose values as an
option.
Recommendation 16.11 was added to
indicate the use of SGLT2 inhibitors for in-
dividuals with type 2 diabetes hospitalized
with heart failure during hospitalization
and that SGLT2 inhibitors should be con-
tinued after recovery from acute illness if
no contraindications are present.
Section 17. Diabetes Advocacy
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S017)
The Care of Young Children With Diabetes
in the Childcare and Community Setting
advocacy statement has been updated.
S10
Summary of Revisions
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

1. Improving Care and Promoting
Health in Populations: Standards
of Care in Diabetes—2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S11–S19 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S001
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” in-
cludes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to
provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guide-
lines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional
Practice Committee, a interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for
updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a
detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the
evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full
list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction
and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are
invited to do so at https://professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
DIABETES AND POPULATION HEALTH
Recommendations
1.1 Ensure treatment decisions are timely, rely on evidence-based guidelines,
capture key elements within the social determinants of health, and are made
collaboratively with people with diabetes and care partners based on individual
preferences, prognoses, comorbidities, and informed ﬁnancial considerations. B
1.2 Align approaches to diabetes management with the Chronic Care Model. This
model emphasizes person-centered team care, integrated long-term treatment
approaches to diabetes and comorbidities, and ongoing collaborative communi-
cation and goal setting between all team members. A
1.3 Care systems should facilitate in-person and virtual team-based care, in-
clude those knowledgeable and experienced in diabetes management as part
of the team, and utilize patient registries, decision support tools, and commu-
nity involvement to meet needs of individuals with diabetes. B
1.4 Assess diabetes health care maintenance (Table 4.1) using reliable and relevant
data metrics to improve processes of care and health outcomes, with attention to
care costs, individual preferences and goals for care, and treatment burden. B
Population health is deﬁned as “the health outcomes of a group of individuals, in-
cluding the distribution of health outcomes within the group”; these outcomes can
be measured in terms of health outcomes (mortality, morbidity, and functional sta-
tus), disease burden (incidence and prevalence), and behavioral and metabolic fac-
tors (physical activity, nutrition, A1C, etc.) (1). Clinical practice recommendations
for health care professionals are tools that can ultimately improve health across
populations; however, for optimal outcomes, diabetes care must also be individual-
ized for each person with diabetes and across their life span. Thus, efforts to improve
population health will require a combination of policy-level, system-level, and
*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee. 1. Improving care
and promoting health in populations: Standards
of Care in Diabetes—2024. Diabetes Care 2024;
47(Suppl. 1):S11–S19
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
1. IMPROVING CARE AND PROMOTING HEALTH
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
S11
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

person-level approaches. With such an
integrated approach in mind, the Ameri-
can Diabetes Association (ADA) high-
lights the importance of person-centered
care, deﬁned as care that considers an in-
dividual’s comorbidities and prognoses; is
respectful of and responsive to individual
preferences, needs, and values; and en-
sures that the individual’s values guide all
clinical decisions (2). Furthermore, wider
social determinants of health (SDOH)—
often out of direct control of the individ-
ual and potentially representing lifelong
risk—contribute to health care and psy-
chosocial outcomes and must be ad-
dressed to improve all health outcomes
(3). Clinical practice recommendations,
whether based on evidence orexpert opin-
ion, are intended to guide an overall ap-
proach to care. The science and art of
health care come together when the clini-
cian makes treatment decisions for a per-
son who may not meet the eligibility
criteria used in the studies on which guide-
lines are based. Recognizing that one size
does not ﬁt all, the standards presented
here provide guidance for when and how
to adapt recommendations for an individ-
ual. This section provides guidance for
health care professionals as well as health
systems, payers, and policymakers.
Status and Demographics of Diabetes
Care
The proportion of people with diabetes
who achieve recommended A1C, blood
pressure, and LDL cholesterol levels has
ﬂuctuated over the years, with some
improvement over time (4). Glycemic
management and management of cho-
lesterol through dietary intake remain
challenging. In 2015–2018, just 50.5%
of U.S. community-dwelling adults with
diabetes achieved A1C <7% and 75.4%
achieved A1C <8%. The goal blood pres-
sure of <130/80 mmHg was achieved by
just 47.7% adults with diabetes, while
70.4% achieved blood pressure <140/90
mmHg. Lipid control, then deﬁned as
non-HDL cholesterol <130 mg/dL, was
achieved by 55.7% adults with diabetes,
and all three risk factors were controlled
by just 22.2%. Importantly, many people
who did not attain A1C, blood pressure,
and lipid goals are not receiving any or
adequate pharmacotherapy for glycemic,
hypertension, and dyslipidemia manage-
ment, respectively, which underscores the
vital and urgent need for care delivery
systems to engage and support people
living with diabetes. Certain segments of
the population, such as young adults and
individuals with complex comorbidities,
ﬁnancial or other social hardships, and/or
limited English proﬁciency, as well as indi-
viduals in ethnic minority populations,
face particular challenges to goal-based
care (5–7). A U.S. population–based study
based on the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES) showed that
younger people with diabetes, individuals
who are Mexican American or non-Hispanic
Black, those with lower level of educational
attainment, and those who are underin-
sured are most likely to be undertreated,
particularly for glycemic control (4). The
persistent variability in the quality of diabe-
tes care across health care professionals
and practice settings indicates that sub-
stantial system-level improvements are
still needed.
Diabetes and its associated health
complications pose a signiﬁcant ﬁnan-
cial burden to individuals and society. It
is estimated that the annual cost of di-
agnosed diabetes in the U.S. in 2022
was $413 billion, including $307 billion
in direct health care costs and $106 bil-
lion in reduced productivity. After ad-
justing for inﬂation, the economic costs
of diabetes increased by 7% between
2017 and 2022 and by 35% from 2012
to 2022 (8). This is attributed to the in-
creased prevalence of diabetes and the
increased cost per person with diabetes.
People living with diabetes also face ﬁ-
nancial hardship, which is correlated
with higher A1C, diabetes distress, and
depressive symptoms (9). Therefore, on-
going population health strategies like
the Chronic Care Model (CCM) are needed
to reduce costs to the health care system
and to people with diabetes and to pro-
vide optimized care.
Chronic Care Model
Numerous interventions to promote the
recommended standards have been im-
plemented. However, a major barrier to
optimal care is a delivery system that is
often fragmented, lacks clinical informa-
tion capabilities, duplicates services, and
is poorly designed for the coordinated
delivery of chronic care. The CCM is a
commonly used framework for describ-
ing diabetes care programs (10).
Six Core Elements. The CCM includes six
core elements to optimize the care of
people with chronic disease:
1. Delivery system design (moving from
a reactive to a proactive care deliv-
ery system where planned visits are
coordinated through a team-based
approach)
2. Self-management support
3. Decision support, particularly at the
point of care during a clinical en-
counter (basing care on evidence-
based, effective care guidelines)
4. Clinical information systems (using
registries that can provide person-
speciﬁc and population-based sup-
port to the care team)
5. Community resources and policies
(identifying or developing resources
to support healthy lifestyles)
6. Health systems (to create a quality-
oriented culture)
A 5-year effectiveness study of the
CCM in 53,436 people with type 2 diabe-
tes in the primary care setting suggested
that the use of this model of care deliv-
ery reduced the cumulative incidence
of diabetes-related complications and
all-cause mortality (11). Individuals who
were enrolled in the CCM experienced a
reduction in cardiovascular disease risk
by 56.6%, microvascular complications by
11.9%, and mortality by 66.1% (11). In
addition, another study suggested that
health care utilization was lower in the
CCM group, which resulted in health care
savings of $7,294 per individual over the
study period (12).
Redeﬁning the roles of the health care
delivery team and empowering self-
management of people with diabetes
are fundamental to the successful imple-
mentation of the CCM (13). Collabora-
tive, interprofessional teams are best
suited to provide care for people with
chronic conditions such as diabetes and
to facilitate individuals’ self-management
(14–16). There are references to guide
the implementation of the CCM into dia-
betes care delivery, including opportuni-
ties and challenges (17).
Strategies for System-Level Improvement
Optimal diabetes management requires
an organized, systematic approach and
the involvement of a coordinated team
of dedicated health care professionals
working in an environment where per-
son-centered, high-quality care is a pri-
ority (7,17–19). While many diabetes
care processes have improved nation-
ally in the past decade, the overall
S12
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

quality of care for people with diabetes
remains suboptimal (4). Efforts to in-
crease the quality of diabetes care include
providing care that is concordant with
evidence-based guidelines (20); expanding
the role of teams to implement more in-
tensive disease management strategies
(7,16,21,22); tracking medication-taking
behavior at a systems level (23); rede-
signing the organization of the care pro-
cess (24); implementing electronic health
record (EHR) tools (25,26); empowering
and educating people with diabetes
(27,28); removing ﬁnancial barriers and
reducing patient out-of-pocket costs for
diabetes education, eye exams, diabetes
technology, and essential medications
(7,29); leveraging telehealth capabilities
to improve access to care (30); assess-
ing and addressing psychosocial issues
(31,32); and identifying, developing, and
engaging community resources and pub-
lic policies that support healthy lifestyles
(33). The National Diabetes Education Pro-
gram maintains an online resource (cdc.
gov/diabetes/professional-info/training.
html) to help health care professionals
design and implement more effective
health care delivery systems for those
with diabetes. Given the pluralistic needs
of people with diabetes and that the
constant challenges they experience vary
over the course of disease management
(complex insulin treatment plans, new
technology, etc.), a diverse team with
complementary expertise is consistently
recommended (34).
Care Teams
The care team, which centers around
the person with diabetes, should avoid
therapeutic inertia and prioritize timely
and appropriate intensiﬁcation of be-
havior change (nutrition and physical
activity) and/or pharmacologic therapy
for individuals who have not achieved
the recommended metabolic goals (35–37).
Strategies shown to improve care team
behavior and thereby catalyze reductions
in A1C, blood pressure, and/or LDL cho-
lesterol include engaging in explicit and
collaborative goal setting with people
with diabetes (38,39); integrating evi-
dence-based guidelines and clinical infor-
mation tools into the process of care
(20,40,41); identifying and addressing
language, numeracy, or cultural barriers
to care (41–43); soliciting performance
feedback, setting reminders, and providing
structured care (e.g., guidelines, formal
case management, and patient education
resources) (7); and incorporating care
management teams including nurses,
dietitians, pharmacists, and other health
care professionals (21,42). In addition,
initiatives such as the Patient-Centered
Medical Home can improve health out-
comes by fostering comprehensive pri-
mary care and offering new opportunities
for team-based chronic disease manage-
ment (43,44).
Telehealth
Telehealth is a growing ﬁeld that may in-
crease access to care for people with diabe-
tes.The American Telemedicine Association
deﬁnes telemedicine as the use of medical
information exchanged from one site to an-
other via electronic communications to
improve a patient’s clinical health status.
Telehealth includes a growing variety of
applications and services using two-way
video, smartphones, wireless tools, and
other forms of telecommunications tech-
nology (45). Often used interchangeably
with telemedicine, telehealth describes a
broader range of digital health services in
health care delivery (46). This includes
synchronous, asynchronous, and remote
patient monitoring.
Telehealth should be used comple-
mentary to in-person visits to optimize
glycemic management in people with un-
managed diabetes (47). Increasingly, evi-
dence suggests that various telehealth
modalities may facilitate reducing A1C in
people with type 2 diabetes compared
with usual care or in addition to usual
care (48), and ﬁndings suggest that tele-
medicine is a safe method of delivering
care for people with type 1 diabetes in
rural areas (49). For rural populations
or those with limited physical access to
health care, telemedicine has a growing
body of evidence for its effectiveness,
particularly with regard to glycemic man-
agement as measured by A1C (30,50–52).
In addition, evidence supports the effec-
tiveness of telehealth in diabetes, hyper-
tension, and dyslipidemia interventions
(53) as well as the telehealth delivery of
motivational interviewing (54). Interactive
strategies that facilitate communication
between health care professionals and
people with diabetes, including the use of
web-based portals or text messaging and
those that incorporate medication adjust-
ment, appear more effective. Telehealth
and other virtual environments can also be
used to offer diabetes self-management
education and clinical support and remove
geographic and transportation barriers for
individuals living in under-resourced areas
or with disabilities (55). Telehealth resour-
ces can also have a role in addressing the
SDOH in young adults with diabetes (56).
However, limited data are available on the
effectiveness across different populations
(57).
Behaviors and Well-being
Successful diabetes care also requires a sys-
tematic approach to supporting the behavior-
change efforts of people with diabetes.
High-quality diabetes self-management
education and support (DSMES) has
been shown to improve patient self-
management, satisfaction, and glucose
outcomes. National DSMES standards call
for an integrated approach that includes
clinical content and skills, behavioral strat-
egies (goal setting, problem-solving), and
engagement with psychosocial concerns.
Increasingly, such support is being adapted
for online platforms that have the poten-
tial to promote patient access to this im-
portant resource. These curriculums need
to be tailored to the needs of the intended
populations, including addressing the
“digital divide,” i.e., access to the technol-
ogy required for implementation (58–61).
For more information on DSMES, see
Section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health
Behaviors and Well-being to Improve
Health Outcomes.”
Cost Considerations for Medication-Taking
Behaviors
The cost of diabetes medications and de-
vices is an ongoing barrier to achieving
glycemic goals. Up to 25% of people
with diabetes who are prescribed insulin
report cost-related insulin underuse (62).
Insulin underuse due to cost has also
been termed “cost-related medication
non-adherence” (here referred to as cost-
related barriers to medication use). There
are recommendations from the ADA Insu-
lin Access and Affordability Working
Group for approaches to this issue from a
systems level (63). Recommendations in-
cluding concepts such as cost-sharing for
insured people with diabetes should be
based on the lowest price available, the
list price for insulins that closely reﬂects
the net price, and health plans that ensure
people with diabetes can access insulin
without undue administrative burden or
excessive cost (63). In 2023, three major
insulin manufacturers lowered the prices
diabetesjournals.org/care
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations
S13
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

of insulin, which may help reduce the ﬁ-
nancial burden of diabetes management,
although costs for insulin delivery and glu-
cose monitoring remain high. People with
diabetes should be screened for ﬁnancial
burden of treatment, cost-related bar-
riers to medication use, and rationing of
other essential services due to medical
costs (64).
The cost of medications (not only insu-
lin) inﬂuences prescribing patterns and
medication use because of burden on the
person with diabetes and lack of second-
ary payer support (public and private
insurance) for effective approved glu-
cose-lowering, cardiovascular disease
risk-reducing, and weight management
therapeutics. Financial barriers remain a
major source of health disparities, and
costs should be a focus of treatment goals
(65). (See TAILORING TREATMENT FOR SOCIAL CON-
TEXT and TREATMENT CONSIDERATIONS.) Reduction
in cost-related barriers to medication use
is associated with better biologic and psy-
chologic outcomes, including quality of
life (66).
Access to Care and Quality Improvement
The Affordable Care Act and Medicaid ex-
pansion have increased access to care for
many individuals with diabetes, empha-
sizing the protection of people with pre-
existing conditions, health promotion, and
disease prevention (67). In fact, health in-
surance coverage increased from 84.7% in
2009 to 90.1% in 2016 for adults with dia-
betes aged 18–64 years. As of early 2022,
more than 35 million people in the U.S.
were enrolled in some form of Affordable
Care Act–related health insurance (68).
Coverage for those aged $65 years re-
mained nearly universal (69). People with
diabetes who have either private or public
insurance coverage are more likely to
meet quality indicators for diabetes care
(70). As mandated by the Affordable Care
Act, the Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality developed a National Quality
Strategy based on triple aims that include
improving the health of a population,
overall quality and patient experience of
care, and per capita cost (71,72). As health
care systems and practices adapt to the
changing landscape of health care, it will
be important to integrate traditional dis-
ease-speciﬁc metrics with measures of
patient experience, as well as cost, in
assessing the quality of diabetes care
(73,74). Information and guidance spe-
ciﬁc to quality improvement and practice
transformation for diabetes care are avail-
able from the National Institute of Diabe-
tes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
guidance on diabetes care and quality
(75) Using patient registries and EHRs,
health systems can evaluate the quality
of diabetes care being delivered and per-
form intervention cycles as part of quality
improvement strategies (76). Improve-
ment of health literacy and numeracy is
also a necessary component to improve
care (77,78). Critical to these efforts is
health professional adherence to clinical
practice recommendations (Table 4.1)
and the use of accurate, reliable data
metrics that include sociodemographic
variables to examine health equity within
and across populations (79).
In addition to quality improvement ef-
forts, other strategies that simultaneously
improve the quality of care and potentially
reduce costs are gaining momentum and
include reimbursement structures that, in
contrast to visit-based billing, reward the
provision of appropriate and high-quality
care to achieve metabolic goals (80), value-
based payments, and incentives that ac-
commodate personalized care goals (7,81).
(Also see COST CONSIDERATIONS FOR MEDICATION-
TAKING
BEHAVIORS, above, regarding cost-
related barriers to medication use.)
TAILORING TREATMENT FOR
SOCIAL CONTEXT
Recommendations
1.5 Assess food insecurity, housing inse-
curity/homelessness, ﬁnancial barriers,
and social capital/social community
support to inform treatment deci-
sions, with referral to appropriate lo-
cal community resources. A
1.6 Provide people with diabetes with
additional self-management support
from lay health coaches, navigators,
or community health workers when
available. A
1.7 Consider the involvement of com-
munity health workers to support the
management of diabetes and cardio-
vascular risk factors, especially in un-
derserved communities and health
care systems. B
Health inequities related to diabetes and
its complications are well documented,
are heavily inﬂuenced by SDOH, and have
been associated with greater risk for dia-
betes, higher population prevalence, and
poorer diabetes outcomes (82–86). SDOH
are deﬁned as the economic, environ-
mental, political, and social conditions in
which people live and are responsible for
a major part of health inequality world-
wide (87). Greater exposure to adverse
SDOH over the life course results in poor
health (88). The ADA recognizes the asso-
ciation between social and environmental
factors and the prevention and treatment
of diabetes and has issued a call for re-
search that seeks to better understand
how social determinants inﬂuence behav-
iors and how the relationships between
these variables might be modiﬁed for the
prevention and management of diabetes
(89,90). While a comprehensive strategy
to reduce diabetes-related health inequi-
ties in populations has not been formally
studied, general recommendations from
other chronic disease management and
prevention models can be drawn upon to
inform systems-level strategies in diabetes
(91). For example, the National Academy
of Medicine has published a framework
for educating health care professionals on
the importance of SDOH (92). Further-
more, there are resources available for
the inclusion of standardized sociodemo-
graphic variables in EHRs to facilitate the
measurement of health inequities and
the impact of interventions designed to
reduce those inequities (74,92,93).
SDOH are not consistently recognized
and often go undiscussed in the clinical
encounter (85). Among people with chronic
illnesses, two-thirds of those who re-
ported not taking medications as pre-
scribed due to cost-related barriers to
medication use never shared this with
their physician (94). A study using data
from the National Health Interview Survey
(NHIS) (85) found that one-half of adults
with diabetes reported ﬁnancial stress
and one-ﬁfth reported food insecurity. A
Canadian study noted an association of
one or more adverse SDOH and health
care utilization and poor diabetes out-
comes in high-risk children with type 1 di-
abetes (94). It is therefore important for
people with diabetes to be screened for
SDOH during clinical encounters and be
referred to appropriate clinical and com-
munity resources to address these needs.
Health systems may beneﬁt from compil-
ing an inventory of such resources to fa-
cilitate referrals at the point of care.
Policies and payment models that support
S14
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

addressing SDOH, both within and outside
the health care setting, are needed to en-
sure that these efforts are both feasible
and sustainable. One example of a state-
wide payment model that incentivizes
value-based care, addressing SDOH and-
funding community-based health care pro-
fessionals, is the Maryland Total Cost of
Care Model, although it is currently limited
by a narrow focus such as preventing dia-
betes rather than overall diabetes care
quality (95,96).
Another population in which such is-
sues must be considered is older adults,
for whom social difﬁculties may impair
quality of life and increase the risk of
functional dependency (97) (see Section
13, “Older Adults,” for a detailed discus-
sion of social considerations in older
adults). Creating systems-level mechanisms
to screen for SDOH may help overcome
structural barriers and communication gaps
between people with diabetes and health
care professionals (85,98). Pilot studies
have proven the effectiveness of identify-
ing SDOH by using validated screening
tools (99). In addition, brief, validated
screening tools for some SDOH exist and
could facilitate discussion around factors
that signiﬁcantly impact treatment during
the clinical encounter. Below is a discus-
sion of assessment and treatment consid-
erations in the context of food insecurity,
homelessness, limited English proﬁciency,
limited health literacy, and low literacy.
Food Insecurity
Food insecurity is the unreliable avail-
ability of nutritious food and the inability
to consistently obtain food without re-
sorting to socially unacceptable practi-
ces. Over 18% of the U.S. population
reported food insecurity between 2005
and 2014 (100). The rate is higher in
some racial and ethnic minority groups,
including African American and Latino
populations, low-income households, and
homes headed by single mothers. The
food insecurity rate in individuals with
diabetes may be up to 20% (101). Addi-
tionally, the risk for type 2 diabetes is
increased twofold in those with food in-
security (89) and has been associated
with lower engagement in self-care be-
haviors and medication use, depression,
diabetes distress, and worse glycemic
management when compared with individ-
uals who are food secure (102–104). Older
adults with food insecurity are more likely
to have emergency department visits and
hospitalizations
compared
with
older
adults who do not report food insecurity
(105). Risk for food insecurity can be as-
sessed with a validated two-item screening
tool (106) that includes the following state-
ments: 1) “Within the past 12 months, we
worried whether our food would run out
before we got money to buy more” and
2) “Within the past 12 months the food we
bought just didn’t last, and we didn’t have
money to get more.” An afﬁrmative re-
sponse to either statement had a sensitivity
of 97% and speciﬁcity of 83%. Interventions
such as food prescription programs are con-
sidered promising to address food insecu-
rity by integrating community resources
into primary care settings and directly deal-
ing with food deserts in underserved com-
munities (107,108).
Treatment Considerations
In those with diabetes and food insecurity,
the priority is mitigating the increased risk
for uncontrolled hyperglycemia and se-
vere hypoglycemia. The reasons for the
increased risk of hyperglycemia include
the steady consumption of inexpensive
carbohydrate-rich processed foods, binge
eating, ﬁnancial constraints to ﬁlling dia-
betes medication prescriptions, and anxiety
and depression leading to poor diabetes
self-care behaviors. Hypoglycemia can
occur due to inadequate or erratic car-
bohydrate consumption following the
administration of sulfonylureas or insu-
lin. See Tables 9.2–9.4 for drug-speciﬁc
and patient factors, including cost and
risk of hypoglycemia, which may be im-
portant considerations for adults with
food insecurity and type 2 diabetes.
Health care professionals should con-
sider these factors when making treat-
ment decisions for people with food
insecurity and seek local resources to
help people with diabetes and their fam-
ily members obtain nutritious food more
regularly (109).
Homelessness and Housing
Insecurity
Homelessness and housing insecurity of-
ten accompany other barriers that limit
diabetes self-management. Food insecu-
rity, lack of insurance, cognitive impair-
ment, behavioral health deﬁciencies, and
low literacy and numeracy skills are also
factors (110). The prevalence of diabetes
in the homeless population is estimated
to be around 8% (111). Additionally, people
with diabetes who are homeless need se-
cure places to keep their diabetes supplies
and refrigerator access to properly store
their insulin and take it on a regular sched-
ule.The risk for homelessness can be ascer-
tained using a brief risk assessment tool
developed and validated for use among
veterans (112). Housing insecurity has also
been shown to be directly associated with
a person’s ability to maintain their diabetes
self-management (113). Given the poten-
tial challenges, health care professionals
who care for either homeless or housing-
insecure individuals should be familiar with
resources or have access to social workers
who can facilitate stable housing for these
individuals as a way to improve diabetes
care (114).
Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural
Workers
Migrant and seasonal agricultural workers
may have a higher risk of type 2 diabetes
than the overall population.While migrant
farmworker–speciﬁc data are lacking, most
agricultural workers in the U.S. are Latino, a
population with a high rate of type 2 diabe-
tes. In addition, living in severe poverty
brings with it food in-security, high chronic
stress, and an increased risk of diabetes;
there is also an association between the
use of certain pesticides and the incidence
of diabetes (115).
Data from the Department of Labor in-
dicate that there are 2.5–3 million agricul-
tural workers in the U.S.These agricultural
workers travel throughout the country,
serving as the backbone for a multibillion-
dollar agricultural industry. According to
2021 health center data, 175 health cen-
ters across the U.S. reported that they
provided health care services to 893,260
adult agricultural patients, and 91,124
had encounters for diabetes (10.2%) (116).
Migrant farmworkers encounter numer-
ous and overlapping barriers to receiving
care. Migration, which may occur as fre-
quently as every few weeks for farm-
workers, disrupts care. In addition, cultural
and linguistic barriers, lack of transporta-
tion and money, lack of available work
hours, unfamiliarity with new communi-
ties, lack of access to resources, and other
barriers
prevent
migrant
farmworkers
from accessing health care. Without regu-
lar care, those with diabetes may suffer se-
vere and often expensive complications
that affect quality of life. Nontraditional
care delivery models, including mobile in-
tegrated health and telehealth, can be
diabetesjournals.org/care
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations
S15
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

leveraged to improve access to high qual-
ity care.
Health care professionals should be at-
tuned to all patients’ working and living
conditions. For example, if a migrant farm-
worker with diabetes presents for care,
appropriate referrals should be initiated
to social workers and community resour-
ces, as available, to assist with removing
barriers to care.
Language Barriers
Health care professionals who care for
non–English speakers should develop or
offer educational programs and materials
in culturally adaptive languages speciﬁc
to these individuals with the speciﬁc goals
of preventing diabetes and building dia-
betes awareness in people who cannot
easily read or write in English. The Na-
tional Standards for Culturally and Lin-
guistically Appropriate Services in Health
and Health Care (National CLAS Stand-
ards) provide guidance on how health
care professionals can reduce language
barriers by improving their cultural com-
petency, addressing health literacy, and
ensuring communication with language
assistance (117). In addition, the National
CLAS Standards website offers several re-
sources and materials that can be used to
improve the quality of care delivery to
non–English-speaking individuals (117).
Health Literacy and Numeracy
Health literacy is deﬁned as the degree to
which individuals have the capacity to ob-
tain, process, and understand basic health
information and services needed to make
appropriate decisions (77). Health literacy
is strongly associated with patients engag-
ing in complex disease management and
self-care (118). Approximately 80 million
adults in the U.S. are estimated to have
limited or low health literacy (78). Clini-
cians and diabetes care and education
specialists should ensure they provide
easy-to-understand information and re-
duce unnecessary complexity when de-
veloping care plans with people with
diabetes. Interventions addressing low
health literacy in populations with diabe-
tes seem effective in improving diabetes
outcomes, including ones focusing primar-
ily on patient education, self-care training,
or disease management. Combining easily
adapted materials with formal diabetes
education demonstrates effectiveness
on clinical and behavioral outcomes in
populations with low literacy (119). How-
ever, evidence supporting these strategies
is largely limited to observational studies.
More research is needed to investigate
the most effective strategies for en-
hancing both acquisition and retention
of diabetes knowledge and examine
different media and strategies for de-
livering interventions to people with
diabetes (120).
Health numeracy is also essential in
diabetes prevention and management.
Health numeracy requires primary nu-
meric skills, applied health numeracy, and
interpretive health numeracy. An emo-
tional component also affects a person’s
ability to understand concepts of risk,
probability, and communication of scien-
tiﬁc evidence (121). People with predia-
betes or diabetes often need to perform
numeric tasks such as interpreting food
labels and blood glucose levels to make
treatment decisions such as medication
dosing. Thus, both health literacy and nu-
meracy are necessary for enabling effec-
tive communication between people with
diabetes and health professionals, arriving
at a treatment plan, and making diabetes
self-management task decisions. If peo-
ple with diabetes appear not to under-
stand concepts associated with treatment
decisions, both can be assessed using stan-
dardized screening measures (122). Ad-
junctive education and support may be
indicated if limited health literacy and nu-
meracy are barriers to optimal care deci-
sions (31).
Social Capital and Community
Support
Social capital, which comprises community
and personal network instrumental sup-
port, promotes better health, whereas
lack of social support is associated with
poorer health outcomes in individuals
with diabetes (90). Of particular concern
are the SDOH, including racism and dis-
crimination, which are likely to be lifelong
(123). These factors are rarely addressed
in routine treatment or disease manage-
ment but may be underlying reasons for
lower engagement in self-care behaviors
and medication use. Community resour-
ces are recognized by the CCM as a core
component of chronic care management
(10), with a particular need to incorporate
relevant social support networks. There is
currently a paucity of evidence regarding
enhancing these resources for those most
likely to beneﬁt from such intervention
strategies.
Health care community linkages are re-
ceiving increasing attention from the Amer-
ican Medical Association, the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality, and
others to promote the translation of clini-
cal recommendations for nutrition and
physical activity in real-world settings
(124). Community health workers (CHWs)
(125), community paramedics (126), peer
supporters (127–129), and lay leaders
(130) may assist in the delivery of DSMES
services (92,131), particularly in under-
served communities.The American Public
Health Association deﬁnes a CHW as a
“frontline public health worker who is a
trusted member of and/or has an unusu-
ally close understanding of the commu-
nity served” (132). CHWs can be part of a
cost-effective, evidence-based strategy to
improve the management of diabetes
and cardiovascular risk factors in under-
served communities and health care sys-
tems (133). The CHW scope of practice in
areas such as outreach and communica-
tion, advocacy, social support, basic health
education, referrals to community clinics,
and other services has successfully pro-
vided social and primary preventive serv-
ices to underserved populations in rural
and hard-to-reach communities. Even though
CHWs’ core competencies are not clinical
in nature, in some circumstances, clini-
cians may delegate limited clinical tasks
to CHWs. If such is the case, these tasks
must always be performed under the di-
rection and supervision of the delegating
health professional and following state
health care laws and statutes (134,135).
Community paramedics are advanced
paramedics with training in chronic dis-
ease monitoring and education, medica-
tion management, care coordination, and
SDOH in addition to their emergency
medical services expertise. While their
scope of practice varies across states,
community paramedics can engage and
support people living with diabetes under
the direction of a medical director by de-
livering diabetes education, assisting with
medication management, performing health
assessments and wound care, and con-
necting people with diabetes and care
partners with clinical and community re-
sources (126).
References
1. Kindig D, Stoddart G. What is population
health? Am J Public Health 2003;93:380–383
S16
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

2. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on
Quality of Health Care in America. Crossing the
Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st
Century. Washington, DC, National Academies
Press, 2001
3. Haire-Joshu D, Hill-Briggs F. The next generation
of diabetes translation: a path to health equity.
Annu Rev Public Health 2019;40:391–410
4. Fang M, Wang D, Coresh J, Selvin E. Trends in
diabetes treatment and control in U.S. adults,
1999–2018. N Engl J Med 2021;384:2219–2228
5. Kerr EA, Heisler M, Krein SL, et al. Beyond
comorbidity counts: how do comorbidity type and
severity inﬂuence diabetes patients’ treatment
priorities and self-management? J Gen Intern Med
2007;22:1635–1640
6. Fernandez A, Schillinger D, Warton EM, et al.
Language barriers, physician-patient language
concordance, and glycemic control among insured
Latinos with diabetes: the Diabetes Study of
Northern California (DISTANCE). J Gen Intern Med
2011;26:170–176
7. TRIAD Study Group. Health systems, patients
factors, and quality of care for diabetes: a
synthesis of ﬁndings from the TRIAD study.
Diabetes Care 2010;33:940–947
8. Parker ED, Lin J, Mahoney T, et al. Economic
costs of diabetes in the U.S. in 2022. Diabetes Care
1 November 2023 [Epub ahead of print]. DOI:
10.2337/dci23-0085
9. Patel MR, Zhang G, Heisler M, et al.
Measurement and validation of the comprehensive
score for ﬁnancial toxicity (COST) in a population
with diabetes. Diabetes Care 2022;45:2535–2543
10. Stellefson M, Dipnarine K, Stopka C. The
chronic care model and diabetes management in
US primary care settings: a systematic review.
Prev Chronic Dis 2013;10:E26
11. Wan EYF, Fung CSC, Jiao FF, et al. Five-year
effectiveness of the multidisciplinary Risk Assessment
and Management Programme-Diabetes Mellitus
(RAMP-DM) on diabetes-related complications
and health service uses-a population-based and
propensity-matched cohort study. Diabetes Care
2018;41:49–59
12. Jiao FF, Fung CSC, Wan EYF, et al. Five-year
cost-effectiveness of the multidisciplinary Risk
Assessment and Management Programme-Diabetes
Mellitus (RAMP-DM). Diabetes Care 2018;41:250–
257
13. Coleman K, Austin BT, Brach C, Wagner EH.
Evidence on the Chronic Care Model in the new
millennium. Health Aff (Millwood) 2009;28:
75–85
14. Piatt GA, Anderson RM, Brooks MM, et al.
3-Year follow-up of clinical and behavioral
improvements following a multifaceted diabetes
care intervention: results of a randomized controlled
trial. Diabetes Educ 2010;36:301–309
15. Katon WJ, Lin EH, Von Korff M, et al.
Collaborative care for patients with depression
and chronic illnesses. N Engl J Med 2010;363:
2611–2620
16. Herges JR, Matulis JC 3rd, Kessler ME,
Ruehmann LL, Mara KC, McCoy RG. Evaluation of
an enhanced primary care team model to improve
diabetes care. Ann Fam Med 2022;20:505–511
17. Tricco AC, Ivers NM, Grimshaw JM, et al.
Effectiveness of quality improvement strategies
on the management of diabetes: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Lancet 2012;379:2252–
2261
18. Schmittdiel JA, Gopalan A, Lin MW, Banerjee S,
Chau CV, Adams AS. Population health management
for diabetes: health care system-level approaches for
improving quality and addressing disparities. Curr
Diab Rep 2017;17:31
19. Peterson KA, Carlin CS, Solberg LI, Normington
J, Lock EF. Care management processes important
for high-quality diabetes care. Diabetes Care 2023;
46:1762–1769
20. O’Connor PJ, Bodkin NL, Fradkin J, et al.
Diabetes performance measures: current status
and future directions. Diabetes Care 2011;34:1651–
1659
21. Jaffe MG, Lee GA, Young JD, Sidney S, Go AS.
Improved blood pressure control associated with
a large-scale hypertension program. JAMA 2013;
310:699–705
22. Peikes D, Chen A, Schore J, Brown R. Effects
of care coordination on hospitalization, quality
of care, and health care expenditures among
Medicare beneﬁciaries: 15 randomized trials. JAMA
2009;301:603–618
23. Raebel MA, Schmittdiel J, Karter AJ, Konieczny
JL, Steiner JF. Standardizing terminology and
deﬁnitions of medication adherence and persis-
tence in research employing electronic databases.
Med Care 2013;51(Suppl. 3):S11–S21
24. Feifer C, Nemeth L, Nietert PJ, et al. Different
paths to high-quality care: three archetypes of
top-performing practice sites. Ann Fam Med 2007;
5:233–241
25. Reed M, Huang J, Graetz I, et al. Outpatient
electronic health records and the clinical care
and outcomes of patients with diabetes mellitus.
Ann Intern Med 2012;157:482–489
26. Cebul RD, Love TE, Jain AK, Hebert CJ.
Electronic health records and quality of diabetes
care. N Engl J Med 2011;365:825–833
27. Battersby M, Von Korff M, Schaefer J, et al.
Twelve evidence-based principles for implementing
self-management support in primary care. Jt
Comm J Qual Patient Saf 2010;36:561–570
28. Grant RW, Wald JS, Schnipper JL, et al.
Practice-linked online personal health records for
type 2 diabetes mellitus: a randomized controlled
trial. Arch Intern Med 2008;168:1776–1782
29. Herges JR, Neumiller JJ, McCoy RG. Easing
the ﬁnancial burden of diabetes management: a
guide for patients and primary care clinicians.
Clin Diabetes 2021;39:427–436
30. Kobe EA, Lewinski AA, Jeffreys AS, et al.
Implementation of an intensive telehealth inter-
vention for rural patients with clinic-refractory
diabetes. J Gen Intern Med 2022;37:3080–3088
31. Young-Hyman D, de Groot M, Hill-Briggs F,
Gonzalez JS, Hood K, Peyrot M. Psychosocial care
for people with diabetes: a position statement of
the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care
2016;39:2126–2140
32. Davis J, Fischl AH, Beck J, et al. 2022 National
standards for diabetes self-management education
and support. Sci Diabetes Self Manag Care 2022;
48:44–59
33. Pullen-Smith B, Carter-Edwards L, Leathers
KH. Community health ambassadors: a model for
engaging community leaders to promote better
health in North Carolina. J Public Health Manag
Pract 2008;14(Suppl.):S73–S81
34. Levengood TW, Peng Y, Xiong KZ, et al.;
Community Preventive Services Task Force.Team-
based care to Improve diabetes management: a
community guide meta-analysis. Am J Prev Med
2019;57:e17–e26
35. Davidson MB. How our current medical care
system fails people with diabetes: lack of timely,
appropriate clinical decisions. Diabetes Care 2009;
32:370–372
36. Selby JV, Uratsu CS, Fireman B, et al.
Treatment intensiﬁcation and risk factor control:
toward more clinically relevant quality measures.
Med Care 2009;47:395–402
37. Raebel MA, Ellis JL, Schroeder EB, et al.
Intensiﬁcation of antihyperglycemic therapy among
patients with incident diabetes: a Surveillance
Prevention and Management of Diabetes Mellitus
(SUPREME-DM) study. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug
Saf 2014;23:699–710
38. Grant RW, Pabon-Nau L, Ross KM, Youatt EJ,
Pandiscio JC, Park ER. Diabetes oral medication
initiation and intensiﬁcation: patient views
compared with current treatment guidelines.
Diabetes Educ 2011;37:78–84
39. Tamhane S, Rodriguez-Gutierrez R, Hargraves
I, Montori VM. Shared decision-making in diabetes
care. Curr Diab Rep 2015;15:112
40. Garg AX, Adhikari NK, McDonald H, et al.
Effects of computerized clinical decision support
systems on practitioner performance and patient
outcomes: a systematic review. JAMA 2005;293:
1223–1238
41. Smith SA, Shah ND, Bryant SC, et al.; Evidens
Research Group. Chronic care model and shared
care in diabetes: randomized trial of an electronic
decision support system. Mayo Clin Proc 2008;83:
747–757
42. Stone RA, Rao RH, Sevick MA, et al. Active care
management supported by home telemonitoring in
veterans with type 2 diabetes: the DiaTel
randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care 2010;
33:478–484
43. Bojadzievski T, Gabbay RA. Patient-centered
medical home and diabetes. Diabetes Care 2011;
34:1047–1053
44. McManus LS, Dominguez-Cancino KA,
Stanek MK, et al. The patient-centered medical
home as an intervention strategy for diabetes
mellitus: a systematic review of the literature. Curr
Diabetes Rev 2021;17:317–331
45. Telligen and gpTRAC (Great Plains Telehealth
Resource & Assistance Center). Telehealth Start-
Up and Resource Guide Version 1.1, October
2014. Accessed 24 September 2023. Available
from https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/
telehealthguide_ﬁnal_0.pdf
46. American Medical Association. AMA telehealth
quick guide. Accessed 24 September 2023.
Available from https://www.ama-assn.org/practice
-management/digital/ama-telehealth-quick-guide
47. Mullur RS, Hsiao JS, Mueller K.Telemedicine in
diabetes care. Am Fam Physician 2022;105:281–288
48. Lee SWH, Chan CKY, Chua SS, Chaiyakunapruk
N. Comparative effectiveness of telemedicine
strategies on type 2 diabetes management: a
systematic review and network meta-analysis.
Sci Rep 2017;7:12680
49. Xu T, Pujara S, Sutton S, Rhee M.Telemedicine
in the management of type 1 diabetes. Prev Chronic
Dis 2018;15:E13
50. Faruque LI, Wiebe N, Ehteshami-Afshar A,
et al.; Alberta Kidney Disease Network. Effect of
telemedicine on glycated hemoglobin in diabetes:
a systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized trials. CMAJ 2017;189:E341–E364
diabetesjournals.org/care
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations
S17
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

51. Marcolino MS, Maia JX, Alkmim MB, Boersma
E, Ribeiro AL. Telemedicine application in the care
of diabetes patients: systematic review and meta-
analysis. PLoS One 2013;8:e79246
52. Heitkemper EM, Mamykina L, Travers J,
Smaldone A. Do health information technology
self-management interventions improve glycemic
control in medically underserved adults with
diabetes? A systematic review and meta-analysis.
J Am Med Inform Assoc 2017;24:1024–1035
53. Timpel P, Oswald S, Schwarz PEH, Harst L.
Mapping the evidence on the effectiveness of
telemedicine interventions in diabetes, dyslipidemia,
and hypertension: an umbrella review of systematic
reviews and meta-analyses. J Med Internet Res
2020;22:e16791
54. McDaniel CC, Kavookjian J, Whitley HP.
Telehealth delivery of motivational interviewing
for diabetes management: a systematic review of
randomized controlled trials. Patient Educ Couns
2022;105:805–820
55. Reagan L, Pereira K, Jefferson V, et al.
Diabetes self-management training in a virtual
environment. Diabetes Educ 2017;43:413–421
56. Garcia JF, Fogel J, Reid M, Bisno DI, Raymond
JK. Telehealth for young adults with diabetes:
addressing social determinants of health. Diabetes
Spectr 2021;34:357–362
57. Haynes SC, Kompala T, Neinstein A, Rosenthal
J, Crossen S. Disparities in telemedicine use for
subspecialty diabetes care during COVID-19
shelter-in-place orders. J Diabetes Sci Technol
2021;15:986–992
58. Dack C, Ross J, Stevenson F, et al. A digital
self-management intervention for adults with
type 2 diabetes: combining theory, data and
participatory design to develop HeLP-Diabetes.
Internet Interv 2019;17:100241
59. Lee MK, Lee DY, Ahn HY, Park CY. A novel
user utility score for diabetes management using
tailored mobile coaching: secondary analysis of
a randomized controlled trial. JMIR Mhealth
Uhealth 2021;9:e17573
60. Dening J, Islam SMS, George E, Maddison R.
Web-based interventions for dietary behavior in
adults with type 2 diabetes: systematic review of
randomized controlled trials. J Med Internet Res
2020;22:e16437
61. Omar MA, Hasan S, Palaian S, Mahameed S.
The impact of a self-management educational
program coordinated through WhatsApp on
diabetes control. Pharm Pract (Granada) 2020;
18:1841
62. Herkert D, Vijayakumar P, Luo J, et al. Cost-
related insulin underuse among patients with
diabetes. JAMA Intern Med 2019;179:112–114
63. Cefalu WT, Dawes DE, Gavlak G, et al.;
Insulin Access and Affordability Working Group.
Insulin Access and Affordability Working Group:
conclusions and recommendations. Diabetes Care
2018;41:1299–1311
64. American Diabetes Association. Insulin cost
and affordability: leading the ﬁght for insulin
affordability. Accessed 10 April 2023. Available
from https://diabetes.org/tools-support/insulin-
affordability
65. Taylor SI. The high cost of diabetes drugs:
disparate impact on the most vulnerable patients.
Diabetes Care 2020;43:2330–2332
66. Taha MB, Valero-Elizondo J, Yahya T, et al.
Cost-related medication nonadherence in adults
with diabetes in the United States: the National
Health Interview Survey 2013–2018. Diabetes
Care 2022;45:594–603
67. Myerson R, Laiteerapong N. The Affordable
Care Act and diabetes diagnosis and care:
exploring the potential impacts. Curr Diab Rep
2016;16:27
68. Ofﬁce of the Assistant Secretary for Planning
and Evaluation. Health coverage changes under
the Affordable Care Act. End of 2021 update.
2022. Accessed 11 August 2023. Available from
https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/health-coverage
-changes-2021-update
69. Casagrande SS, McEwen LN, Herman WH.
Changes in health insurance coverage under the
Affordable Care Act: a national sample of U.S.
adults with diabetes, 2009 and 2016. Diabetes
Care 2018;41:956–962
70. Doucette ED, Salas J, Scherrer JF. Insurance
coverage and diabetes quality indicators among
patients in NHANES. Am J Manag Care 2016;
22:484–490
71. Stiefel M, Nolan K. Measuring the triple aim:
a call for action. Popul Health Manag 2013;16:
219–220
72. Agency for Healthcare Research & Quality.
About the National Quality Strategy. Accessed 24
September 2023. Available from https://www
.ahrq.gov/workingforquality/about/index.html
73. Burstin H, Johnson K. Getting to better care
and outcomes for diabetes through measurement.
Am J Manag Care 2016;22:SP145–SP146
74. National Quality Forum. National voluntary
consensus standards for ambulatory care—
measuring healthcare disparities. 2008. Accessed
24 September 2023. Available from https://www
.qualityforum.org/Publications/2008/03/National_
Voluntary_Consensus_Standards_for_Ambulatory_
Care%E2%80%94Measuring_Healthcare_Disparities
.aspx
75. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases. Diabetes for health professionals.
Accessed 24 September 2023. Available from
https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/
professionals/clinical-tools-patient-management/
diabetes
76. O’Connor PJ, Sperl-Hillen JM, Fazio CJ,
Averbeck BM, Rank BH, Margolis KL. Outpatient
diabetes clinical decision support: current status
and future directions. Diabet Med 2016;33:734–
741
77. Institute of Medicine Committee on Health
Literacy. Health Literacy: A Prescription to End
Confusion. Nielsen-Bohlman L, Panzer AM, Kindig
DA, Eds. Washington, DC, National Academies
Press, 2004
78. Schafﬂer J, Leung K, Tremblay S, et al. The
effectiveness of self-management interventions
for individuals with low health literacy and/or
low income: a descriptive systematic review. J
Gen Intern Med 2018;33:510–523
79. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
CMS framework for health equity. Accessed 24
September 2023. Available from https://www
.cms.gov/About-CMS/Agency-Information/OMH/
equity-initiatives/framework-for-health-equity
80. Rosenthal MB, Cutler DM, Feder J. The ACO
rules–striking the balance between participation
and transformative potential. N Engl J Med 2011;
365:e6
81. Washington AE, Lipstein SH. The Patient-
Centered Outcomes Research Institute–promoting
better information, decisions, and health. N Engl J
Med 2011;365:e31
82. Hutchinson RN, Shin S. Systematic review of
health disparities for cardiovascular diseases and
associated factors among American Indian and
Alaska Native populations. PLoS One 2014;9:
e80973
83. Borschuk AP, Everhart RS. Health disparities
among youth with type 1 diabetes: a systematic
review of the current literature. Fam Syst Health
2015;33:297–313
84. Walker RJ, Strom Williams J, Egede LE.
Inﬂuence of race, ethnicity and social deter-
minants of health on diabetes outcomes. Am J
Med Sci 2016;351:366–373
85. Patel MR, Piette JD, Resnicow K, Kowalski-
Dobson T, Heisler M. Social determinants of health,
cost-related nonadherence, and cost-reducing
behaviors among adults with diabetes: ﬁndings
from the National Health Interview Survey. Med
Care 2016;54:796–803
86. Steve SL, Tung EL, Schlichtman JJ, Peek ME.
Social disorder in adults with type 2 diabetes:
building on race, place, and poverty. Curr Diab
Rep 2016;16:72
87. Commission on Social Determinants of Health.
Closing the gap in a generation: health equity
through action on the social determinants of
health. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008.
Accessed 24 September 2023. Available from
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-IER
-CSDH-08.1
88. Dixon B, Pe~na MM, Taveras EM. Lifecourse
approach to racial/ethnic disparities in childhood
obesity. Adv Nutr 2012;3:73–82
89. Hill JO, Galloway JM, Goley A, et al. Scientiﬁc
statement: socioecological determinants of pre-
diabetes and type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care
2013;36:2430–2439
90. Hill-Briggs F, Adler NE, Berkowitz SA, et al.
Social determinants of health and diabetes: a
scientiﬁc review. Diabetes Care 2020;44:258–279
91. U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. Secretary’s Advisory Committee on
National
Health
Promotion
and
Disease
Prevention Objectives for 2020. Accessed 11
August 2023. Available from https://health.gov/
our-work/national-health-initiatives/healthy
-people/healthy-people-2020/secretarys-advisory
-committee-2020
92. National Academy of Sciences. A Framework
for Educating Health Professionals to Address the
Social Determinants of Health. 2016. Accessed
24 September 2023. Available from https://www
.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27854400
93. Chin MH, Clarke AR, Nocon RS, et al. A
roadmap and best practices for organizations to
reduce racial and ethnic disparities in health care.
J Gen Intern Med 2012;27:992–1000
94. Hershey JA, Morone J, Lipman TH, Hawkes
CP. Social determinants of health, goals and
outcomes in high-risk children with type 1
diabetes. Can J Diabetes 2021;45:444–450.e1
95. Jiang DH, O’Connor PJ, Huguet N, Golden
SH, McCoy RG. Modernizing diabetes care quality
measures. Health Aff (Millwood) 2022;41:955–
962
96. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Maryland Total Cost of Care Model. Accessed
15 September 2023. Available from https://www
.cms.gov/priorities/innovation/innovation-models/
md-tccm
S18
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

97. Laiteerapong N, Karter AJ, Liu JY, et al.
Correlates of quality of life in older adults with
diabetes: the diabetes & aging study. Diabetes
Care 2011;34:1749–1753
98. O’Gurek DT, Henke C. A practical approach
to screening for social determinants of health.
Fam Pract Manag 2018;25:7–12
99. Page-Reeves J, Kaufman W, Bleecker M,
et al. Addressing social determinants of health in
a clinic setting: the WellRx pilot in Albuquerque,
New Mexico. J Am Board Fam Med 2016;29:
414–418
100. Walker RJ, Grusnick J, Garacci E, Mendez C,
Egede LE. Trends in food insecurity in the USA for
individuals with prediabetes, undiagnosed diabetes,
and diagnosed diabetes. J Gen Intern Med
2019;34:33–35
101. Berkowitz SA, Karter AJ, Corbie-Smith G,
et al. Food insecurity, food “deserts,” and glycemic
control in patients with diabetes: a longitudinal
analysis. Diabetes Care 2018;41:1188–1195
102. Heerman WJ,Wallston KA, Osborn CY, et al.
Food insecurity is associated with diabetes self-
care behaviours and glycaemic control. Diabet
Med 2016;33:844–850
103. Silverman J, Krieger J, Kiefer M, Hebert P,
Robinson J, Nelson K. The relationship between
food insecurity and depression, diabetes distress
and medication adherence among low-income
patients with poorly-controlled diabetes. J Gen
Intern Med 2015;30:1476–1480
104. Walker RJ, Garacci E, Ozieh M, Egede LE.
Food insecurity and glycemic control in individuals
with diagnosed and undiagnosed diabetes in the
United States. Prim Care Diabetes 2021;15:813–
818
105. Schroeder EB, Zeng C, Sterrett AT, Kimpo
TK, Paolino AR, Steiner JF. The longitudinal
relationship between food insecurity in older
adults with diabetes and emergency department
visits, hospitalizations, hemoglobin A1c, and
medication adherence. J Diabetes Complications
2019;33:289–295
106. Hager ER, Quigg AM, Black MM, et al.
Development and validity of a 2-item screen to
identify families at risk for food insecurity. Pediatrics
2010;126:e26–e32
107. Goddu AP, Roberson TS, Raffel KE, Chin
MH, Peek ME. Food Rx: a community-university
partnership to prescribe healthy eating on the
South Side of Chicago. J Prev Interv Community
2015;43:148–162
108. Feinberg AT, Hess A, Passaretti M, Coolbaugh
S, Lee TH. Prescribing food as a specialty drug.
NEJM
Catalyst.
10
April
2018.
Accessed
24 September 2023. Available from https://catalyst
.nejm.org/doi/abs/10.1056/CAT.18.0212
109. Seligman HK, Schillinger D. Hunger and
socioeconomic disparities in chronic disease. N
Engl J Med 2010;363:6–9
110. White BM, Logan A, Magwood GS. Access
to diabetes care for populations experiencing
homelessness: an integrated review. Curr Diab
Rep 2016;16:112
111. Bernstein RS, Meurer LN, Plumb EJ, Jackson
JL. Diabetes and hypertension prevalence in
homeless adults in the United States: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Am J Public Health
2015;105:e46–e60
112. Montgomery AE, Fargo JD, Kane V, Culhane
DP. Development and validation of an instrument
to assess imminent risk of homelessness among
veterans. Public Health Rep 2014;129:428–436
113. Stahre M, VanEenwyk J, Siegel P, Njai R.
Housing insecurity and the association with health
outcomes and unhealthy behaviors, Washington
State, 2011. Prev Chronic Dis 2015;12:E109
114. Baxter AJ,Tweed EJ, Katikireddi SV,Thomson
H. Effects of Housing First approaches on health
and well-being of adults who are homeless or at
risk of homelessness: systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomised controlled trials. J Epidemiol
Community Health 2019;73:379–387
115. Evangelou E, Ntritsos G, Chondrogiorgi M,
et al. Exposure to pesticides and diabetes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Environ Int
2016;91:60–68
116. Health Resources & Services Administration.
2022 Special populations funded programs.
Accessed 17 May 2023. Available from https://
data.hrsa.gov/tools/data-reporting/special
-populations
117. U.S. Department of Health &
Human
Services. National Standards for Culturally and
Linguistically Appropriate Services (CLAS) in Health
and Health Care. Accessed 24 September 2023.
Available from https://thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov/
assets/pdfs/EnhancedNationalCLASStandards.pdf
118. Aaby A, Friis K, Christensen B, Rowlands G,
Maindal HT. Health literacy is associated with
health behaviour and self-reported health: a
large population-based study in individuals with
cardiovascular disease. Eur J Prev Cardiol 2017;
24:1880–1888
119. White RO, Eden S, Wallston KA, et al.
Health communication, self-care, and treatment
satisfaction among low-income diabetes patients
in a public health setting. Patient Educ Couns 2015;
98:144–149
120. Schillinger D, Piette J, Grumbach K, et al.
Closing the loop: physician communication with
diabetic patients who have low health literacy.
Arch Intern Med 2003;163:83–90
121. Schapira MM, Fletcher KE, Gilligan MA,
et al. A framework for health numeracy: how
patients use quantitative skills in health care. J
Health Commun 2008;13:501–517
122. Carpenter CR, Kaphingst KA, Goodman MS,
Lin MJ, Melson AT, Griffey RT. Feasibility and
diagnostic accuracy of brief health literacy and
numeracy screening instruments in an urban
emergency department. Acad Emerg Med 2014;21:
137–146
123. Williams DR, Lawrence JA, Davis BA. Racism
and health: evidence and needed research. Annu
Rev Public Health 2019;40:105–125
124. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
Clinical-community linkages. Accessed 24 September
2023. Available
from
https://www.ahrq.gov/
professionals/prevention-chronic-care/improve/
community/index.html
125. Egbujie BA, Delobelle PA, Levitt N, Puoane
T, Sanders D, van Wyk B. Role of community
health workers in type 2 diabetes mellitus self-
management: a scoping review. PLoS One 2018;
13:e0198424
126. Kasper AL, Myers LA, Carlson PN, et al.
Diabetes management for community paramedics:
development and implementation of a novel
curriculum. Diabetes Spectr 2022;35:367–376
127. Heisler M, Vijan S, Makki F, Piette JD.
Diabetes control with reciprocal peer support
versus nurse care management: a randomized
trial. Ann Intern Med 2010;153:507–515
128. Long
JA,
Jahnle
EC,
Richardson
DM,
Loewenstein G, Volpp KG. Peer mentoring and
ﬁnancial incentives to improve glucose control in
African American veterans: a randomized trial.
Ann Intern Med 2012;156:416–424
129. Fisher EB, Boothroyd RI, Elstad EA, et al.
Peer support of complex health behaviors in
prevention and disease management with special
reference to diabetes: systematic reviews. Clin
Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;3:4
130. Foster G, Taylor SJ, Eldridge SE, Ramsay
J, Grifﬁths CJ. Self-management education
programmes by lay leaders for people with
chronic conditions. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2007;4:CD005108
131. Piatt GA, Rodgers EA, Xue L, Zgibor JC.
Integration and utilization of peer leaders for
diabetes self-management support: results from
Project SEED (Support, Education, and Evaluation
in Diabetes). Diabetes Educ 2018;44:373–382
132. Rosenthal
EL,
Rush
CH,
Allen
CG.
Understanding Scope and Competencies: A
Contemporary Lookat the United States Community
Health Worker Field: Progress Report of the
Community Health Worker (CHW) Core Consensus
(C3) Project: Building National Consensus on CHW
Core Roles, Skills, and Qualities. CHW Central,
2016. Accessed 24 September 2023. Available
from
https://ﬁles.ctctcdn.com/a907c850501/1c-
1289f0-88cc-49c3-a238-66def942c147.pdf
133. Guide to Community Preventive Services.
Community health workers help patients manage
diabetes. Updated 25 October 2022. Accessed 24
September 2023. Available from https://www
.thecommunityguide.org/content/community
-health-workers-help-patients-manage-diabetes
134. Cuellar AE, Calonge BN. The Community
Preventive Services Task Force: 25 years of
effectiveness, economics, and equity. Am J Prev
Med 2022;62:e371–e373
135. The Network for Public Health Law. Legal
considerations for community health workers and
their employers. Accessed 21 September 2023.
Available from https://www.networkforphl.org/
resources/legal-considerations-for-community
-health-workers-and-their-employers/
diabetesjournals.org/care
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations
S19
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

2. Diagnosis and Classification of
Diabetes: Standards of Care in
Diabetes—2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S20–S42 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S002
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes
the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the
components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to
evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee, an
interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of
Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA
standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s
clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee
members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to com-
ment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
Diabetes mellitus is a group of metabolic disorders of carbohydrate metabolism in
which glucose is both underutilized as an energy source and overproduced due to in-
appropriate gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis, resulting in hyperglycemia (1). Diabe-
tes can be diagnosed by demonstrating increased concentrations of glucose in venous
plasma or increased A1C in the blood. Diabetes is classiﬁed conventionally into several
clinical categories (e.g., type 1 or type 2 diabetes, gestational diabetes mellitus, and
other speciﬁc types derived from other causes, such as genetic causes, exocrine pan-
creatic disorders, and medications) (2).
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS FOR DIABETES
Recommendations
2.1a Diagnose diabetes based on A1C or plasma glucose criteria, either the fasting
plasma glucose (FPG) value, 2-h plasma glucose (2-h PG) value during a 75-g oral
glucose tolerance test (OGTT), or random glucose value accompanied by classic hy-
perglycemic symptoms/crises criteria (Table 2.1). A
2.1b In the absence of unequivocal hyperglycemia (e.g., hyperglycemic crises),
diagnosis requires conﬁrmatory testing (Table 2.1). A
Diabetes may be diagnosed based on A1C criteria or plasma glucose criteria, either
the fasting plasma glucose (FPG) value, 2-h glucose (2-h PG) value during a 75-g oral
glucose tolerance test (OGTT), or random glucose value accompanied by classic hy-
perglycemic symptoms (e.g., polyuria, polydipsia, and unexplained weight loss) or hy-
perglycemic crises (Table 2.1).
FPG, 2-h PG during 75-g OGTT, and A1C are appropriate for diagnostic screening. It
should be noted that detection rates of different screening tests vary in both popula-
tions and individuals. FPG, 2-h PG, and A1C reﬂect different aspects of glucose me-
tabolism, and diagnostic cut points for the different tests will identify different groups
*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee. 2. Diagnosis and
classiﬁcation of diabetes: Standards of Care in
Diabetes—2024. Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):
S20–S42
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
2. DIAGNOSIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF DIABETES
S20
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

of people (3). Compared with FPG and A1C
cut points, the 2-h PG value diagnoses more
people with prediabetes and diabetes (4).
Moreover, the efﬁcacy of interventions for
primary prevention of type 2 diabetes has
mainly been demonstrated among individu-
als who have impaired glucose tolerance
(IGT) with or without elevated fasting glu-
cose, not for individuals with isolated im-
paired fasting glucose (IFG) or for those with
prediabetes deﬁned by A1C criteria (5–8).
The same tests may be used to screen
for and diagnose diabetes and to detect in-
dividuals with prediabetes (9) (Table 2.1
and Table 2.2). Diabetes may be identiﬁed
anywhere along the spectrum of clinical
scenarios—in seemingly low-risk individuals
who happen to have glucose testing, in indi-
viduals screened based on diabetes risk as-
sessment, and in symptomatic individuals.
There is presently insufﬁcient evidence to
support the use of continuous glucose mon-
itoring (CGM) for screening or diagnosis
of prediabetes or diabetes. For additional
details on the evidence used to establish
the criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes,
prediabetes, and abnormal glucose toler-
ance (IFG and IGT), see the American Diabe-
tes Asso-ciation (ADA) position statement
“Diagnosis and Classiﬁcation of Diabetes
Mellitus” (2) and other reports (3,10,11).
Use of Fasting Plasma Glucose or
2-Hour Plasma Glucose for Screening
and Diagnosis of Diabetes
In the less common clinical scenario where
a person has classic hyperglycemic symp-
toms (e.g., polyuria, polydipsia, and unex-
plained weight loss), measurement of
random plasma glucose is sufﬁcient to diag-
nose diabetes (symptoms of hyperglycemia
or hyperglycemic crisis plus random plasma
glucose $200 mg/dL [$11.1 mmol/L]). In
these cases, knowing the plasma glucose
level is critical because, in addition to con-
ﬁrming that symptoms are due to diabe-
tes, it will inform management decisions.
Health care professionals may also want
to know the A1C to determine the chro-
nicity of hyperglycemia.
In an individual without symptoms, FPG
or 2-h PG can be used for screening and di-
agnosis of diabetes. In nonpregnant individ-
uals, FPG (or A1C) is typically preferred for
routine screening due to the ease of admin-
istration; however, the 2-h PG (OGTT) test-
ing protocol may identify individuals with
diabetes who may otherwise be missed
(e.g., those with cystic ﬁbrosis–related
diabetes or posttransplantation diabe-
tes mellitus). In the absence of classic
hyperglycemic symptoms, repeat test-
ing is required to conﬁrm the diagnosis
regardless of the test used (see CONFIRMING
THE DIAGNOSIS, below).
An advantage of glucose testing is that
these assays are inexpensive and widely
available. Disadvantages include the high
diurnal variation in glucose and fasting re-
quirement. Individuals may have difﬁculty
fasting for the full 8-h period or may mis-
report their fasting status. Recent physical
activity, illness, or acute stress can also af-
fect glucose concentrations. Glycolysis is
also an important and underrecognized
concern with glucose testing. Glucose
concentrations will be falsely low if sam-
ples are not processed promptly or stored
properly prior to analysis (1).
People should consume a mixed diet
with at least 150 g of carbohydrates on
the 3 days prior to OGTT (12–14). Fasting
and carbohydrate restriction can falsely
elevate glucose level with an oral glucose
challenge.
Use of A1C for Screening and
Diagnosis of Diabetes
Recommendations
2.2a The A1C test should be performed
using a method that is certiﬁed by the
National Glycohemoglobin Standardiza-
tion Program (NGSP) as traceable to the
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
(DCCT) reference assay. B
2.2b Point-of-care A1C testing for dia-
betes screening and diagnosis should
be restricted to U.S. Food and Drug
Administration–approved devices at
Clinical Laboratory Improvement Am-
endments (CLIA)–certiﬁed laboratories
that perform testing of moderate com-
plexity or higher by trained personnel. B
2.3 Marked discordance between
A1C and repeat blood glucose values
should raise the possibility of a problem
or interference with either test. B
Table 2.1—Criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes in nonpregnant individuals
A1C $6.5% ($48 mmol/mol). The test should be performed in a laboratory using a method
that is NGSP certiﬁed and standardized to the DCCT assay.*
OR
FPG $126 mg/dL ($7.0 mmol/L). Fasting is deﬁned as no caloric intake for at least 8 h.*
OR
2-h PG $200 mg/dL ($11.1 mmol/L) during OGTT. The test should be performed as
described by the WHO, using a glucose load containing the equivalent of 75 g anhydrous
glucose dissolved in water.*
OR
In an individual with classic symptoms of hyperglycemia or hyperglycemic crisis, a random
plasma glucose $200 mg/dL ($11.1 mmol/L). Random is any time of the day without
regard to time since previous meal.
DCCT, Diabetes Control and Complications Trial; FPG, fasting plasma glucose; OGTT, oral glu-
cose tolerance test; NGSP, National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program; WHO, World
Health Organization; 2-h PG, 2-h plasma glucose. *In the absence of unequivocal hypergly-
cemia, diagnosis requires two abnormal test results obtained at the same time (e.g., A1C
and FPG) or at two different time points.
Table 2.2—Criteria deﬁning prediabetes in nonpregnant individuals
A1C 5.7–6.4% (39–47 mmol/mol)
OR
FPG 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) to 125 mg/dL (6.9 mmol/L) (IFG)
OR
2-h PG during 75-g OGTT 140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L) to 199 mg/dL (11.0 mmol/L) (IGT)
For all three tests, risk is continuous, extending below the lower limit of the range and becoming
disproportionately greater at the higher end of the range. FPG, fasting plasma glucose; IFG, im-
paired fasting glucose; IGT, impaired glucose tolerance; OGTT, oral glucose tolerance test; 2-h PG,
2-h plasma glucose.
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
S21
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

2.4 In conditions associated with an
altered relationship between A1C and
glycemia, such as some hemoglobin var-
iants, pregnancy (second and third tri-
mesters and the postpartum period),
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase de-
ﬁciency, HIV, hemodialysis, recent blood
loss or transfusion, or erythropoietin
therapy, plasma glucose criteria should
be used to diagnose diabetes. B
The A1C test should be performed using a
method that is certiﬁed by the National
Glycohemoglobin Standardization Pro-
gram (NGSP) (ngsp.org) and standardized
or traceable to the Diabetes Control and
Complications Trial (DCCT) reference as-
say. Point-of-care A1C assays may be
NGSP certiﬁed and cleared by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for
use in monitoring glycemic control in
people with diabetes in both Clinical
Laboratory Improvement Amendments
(CLIA)–regulated and CLIA-waived settings.
FDA-approved point-of-care A1C testing
can be used in laboratories or sites that
are CLIA certiﬁed, are inspected, and meet
the CLIA quality standards. These stand-
ards include speciﬁed personnel require-
ments (including documented annual
competency assessments) and participa-
tion three times per year in an approved
proﬁciency testing program (15–18).
A1C has several advantages compared
with FPG and OGTT, including greater conve-
nience (fasting not required), greater pre-
analytical stability, and fewer day-to-day
perturbations during stress, changes in nutri-
tion, or illness. However, it should be noted
that there is lower sensitivity of A1C at the
designated cut point compared with that of
glucose tests as well as greater cost and
limited access in some parts of the world.
A1C reﬂects glucose bound to hemo-
globin over the life span of the erythro-
cyte (120 days) and is thus a “weighted”
average that is more heavily affected by
recent blood glucose exposure. This
means that clinically meaningful changes
in A1C can be seen in <120 days. A1C is
an indirect measure of glucose exposure,
and factors that affect hemoglobin con-
centrations or erythrocyte turnover can
affect A1C (e.g., thalassemia or folate
deﬁciency). A1C may not be a suitable
diagnostic test in people with anemia, peo-
ple treated with erythropoietin, or people
undergoing hemodialysis or HIV treatment
(19,20). Some hemoglobin variants can
interfere with A1C test results, but this de-
pends on the speciﬁc assay. For individuals
with a hemoglobin variant but normal red
blood cell turnover, such as those with the
sickle cell trait, an A1C assay without inter-
ference from hemoglobin variants should
be used. An updated list of A1C assays
with interferences is available at ngsp.org/
interf.asp.
Another
genetic
variant,
X-linked glucose-6-phosphate dehydroge-
nase G202A, carried by 11% of African
American individuals in the U.S., is associ-
ated with a decrease in A1C of about 0.8%
in homozygous men and 0.7% in homozy-
gous women compared with levels in indi-
viduals without the variant (21).
There is controversy regarding racial dif-
ferences in A1C. Studies have found that
African American individuals have slightly
higher A1C levels than non-Hispanic White
or Hispanic people (22–25). The glucose-in-
dependent racial difference in A1C is small
(0.3 percentage points) and may reﬂect
genetic differences in hemoglobin or red
cell turnover that vary by ancestry. There is
an emerging understanding of the genetic
determinants of A1C (21), but the ﬁeld lacks
adequate genetic data in diverse popula-
tions (26,27). While some genetic variants
might be more common in certain race or
ancestry groups, it is important that we do
not use race or ancestry as proxies for
poorly understood genetic differences. Re-
assuringly, studies have shown that the as-
sociation of A1C with risk for complications
appears to be similar in African American
and non-Hispanic White populations (28).
Confirming the Diagnosis
Unless there is a clear clinical diagnosis
(e.g., individual with classic symptoms
of hyperglycemia or hyperglycemic crisis
and random plasma glucose $200 mg/dL
[$11.1 mmol/L]), diagnosis requires two ab-
normal screening test results, measured ei-
ther at the same time (29) or at two
different time points. If using samples at two
different time points, it is recommended
that the second test, which may be either a
repeat of the initial test or a different test,
be performed promptly. For example, if the
A1C is 7.0% (53 mmol/mol) and a repeat re-
sult is 6.8% (51 mmol/mol), the diagnosis of
diabetes is conﬁrmed. Two different tests
(such as A1C and FPG) both having results
above the diagnostic threshold when
collected at the same time or at two dif-
ferent time points would also conﬁrm the di-
agnosis. On the other hand, if an individual
has discordant results from two different
tests, then the test result that is above the
diagnostic cut point should be repeated,
with careful consideration of factors that
may affect measured A1C or glucose levels.
The diagnosis is made based on the conﬁr-
matory screening test. For example, if an in-
dividual meets the diabetes criterion of A1C
(two results $6.5% [$48 mmol/mol]) but
not FPG (<126 mg/dL [<7.0 mmol/L]), that
person should nevertheless be considered
to have diabetes.
If individuals have test results near
the margins of the diagnostic threshold,
the health care professional should edu-
cate the individual about the onset of
possible hyperglycemic symptoms and
repeat the test in 3–6 months.
Consistent and substantial discordance
between glucose and A1C test results should
prompt additional follow-up to determine
the underlying reason for the discrepancy
and whether it has clinical implications for
the individual. In addition, consider other bi-
omarkers, such as fructosamine and glycated
albumin, which are alternative measures of
chronic hyperglycemia that are approved for
clinical use for monitoring glycemic control in
people with diabetes.
CLASSIFICATION
Recommendation
2.5 Classify people with hyperglycemia
into appropriate diagnostic catego-
ries to aid in personalized manage-
ment. E
Diabetes is classiﬁed conventionally into
several
clinical
categories,
although
these are being reconsidered based on
genetic, metabolomic, and other charac-
teristics and pathophysiology (2):
1. Type 1 diabetes (due to autoimmune
b-cell destruction, usually leading to
absolute insulin deﬁciency, including
latent autoimmune diabetes in adults)
2. Type 2 diabetes (due to a non-autoim-
mune progressive loss of adequate
b-cell insulin secretion, frequently on
the background of insulin resistance
and metabolic syndrome)
3. Speciﬁc types of diabetes due to
other causes, e.g., monogenic dia-
betes syndromes (such as neonatal
diabetes and maturity-onset diabetes of
the young), diseases of the exocrine
S22
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

pancreas (such as cystic ﬁbrosis and
pancreatitis), and drug- or chemical-in-
duced diabetes (such as with glucocorti-
coid use, in the treatment of people
with HIV, or after organ transplantation)
4. Gestational diabetes mellitus (diabe-
tes diagnosed in the second or third
trimester of pregnancy that was not
clearly overt diabetes prior to gesta-
tion or other types of diabetes occur-
ring throughout pregnancy, such as
type 1 diabetes).
This section reviews most common forms
of diabetes but is not comprehensive. For
additional information, see the ADA posi-
tion statement “Diagnosis and Classiﬁca-
tion of Diabetes Mellitus” (2).
Type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes are
heterogeneous diseases in which clinical
presentation and disease progression may
vary considerably. Classiﬁcation is impor-
tant for determining personalized therapy,
but some individuals cannot be clearly
classiﬁed as having type 1 or type 2 diabe-
tes at the time of diagnosis.The traditional
paradigms of type 2 diabetes occurring
only in adults and type 1 diabetes only in
children are not accurate, as both diseases
occur in all age-groups. Children with type 1
diabetes often present with the hallmark
symptoms of polyuria/polydipsia, and ap-
proximately half present with diabetic
ketoacidosis (DKA) (30–32). The onset of
type 1 diabetes may be more variable in
adults; they may not present with the classic
symptoms seen in children and may experi-
ence temporary remission from the need
for anticipated full-dose insulin replacement
(33–35).The features most useful in discrim-
ination of type 1 diabetes include younger
age at diagnosis (<35 years) with lower
BMI (<25 kg/m2), unintentional weight
loss, ketoacidosis, and plasma glucose
>360 mg/dL (>20 mmol/L) at presenta-
tion (36) (Fig. 2.1). Other features classi-
cally associated with type 1 diabetes,
such as ketosis without acidosis, osmotic
symptoms, family history, or a history of
autoimmune diseases, are weak discrim-
inators. Occasionally, people with type 2
diabetes may present with DKA (37,38), par-
ticularly members of certain racial and eth-
nic groups (e.g., African American adults,
who may present with ketosis-prone type 2
diabetes) (39).
It is important for health care professio-
nals to realize that classiﬁcation of diabetes
type is not always straightforward at
presentation and that misdiagnosis is com-
mon and can occur in 40% of adults with
new type 1 diabetes (e.g., adults with type
1 diabetes misdiagnosed as having type 2
diabetes and individuals with maturity-
onset diabetes of the young [MODY] mis-
diagnosed as having type 1 diabetes)
(36). Although difﬁculties in distinguish-
ing diabetes type may occur in all age-
groups at onset, the diagnosis becomes
more obvious over time in people with
b-cell deﬁciency as the degree of b-cell
deﬁciency becomes clear (Fig. 2.1). One
useful clinical tool for distinguishing dia-
betes type is the AABBCC approach: Age
(e.g., for individuals <35 years old, consider
type 1 diabetes); Autoimmunity (e.g., per-
sonal or family history of autoimmune
disease or polyglandular autoimmune syn-
dromes); Body habitus (e.g., BMI <25 kg/m2);
Background (e.g., family history of type 1
diabetes); Control (e.g., level of glucose
control on noninsulin therapies); and Co-
morbidities (e.g., treatment with immune
checkpoint inhibitors for cancer can cause
acute autoimmune type 1 diabetes)
(36).
In both type 1 and type 2 diabetes, ge-
netic and environmental factors can re-
sult in the progressive loss of b-cell mass
and/or function that manifests clinically
as hyperglycemia. Once hyperglycemia
occurs, people with all forms of diabetes
are at risk for developing the same
chronic complications, although rates of
progression may differ. The identiﬁcation
of individualized therapies for diabetes
in the future will be informed by better
characterization of the many paths to
b-cell demise or dysfunction (40). Across
the globe, many groups are working on
combining clinical, pathophysiological, and
genetic characteristics to more precisely
deﬁne the subsets of diabetes that are cur-
rently clustered into the type 1 diabetes
versus type 2 diabetes nomenclature with
the goal of optimizing personalized treat-
ment approaches (41).
Characterization of the underlying
pathophysiology is more precisely devel-
oped in type 1 diabetes than in type 2 di-
abetes. It is clear from prospective stud-
ies that the persistent presence of two
or more islet autoantibodies is a near-
certain predictor of clinical diabetes (42).
In at-risk cohorts followed from birth or a
very young age, seroconversion rarely oc-
curs before 6 months of age and there is
a peak in seroconversion between 9 and
24 months of age (43–45). The rate of
progression is dependent on the age at
ﬁrst detection of autoantibody, number of
autoantibodies, autoantibody speciﬁcity, and
autoantibody titer. Glucose and A1C levels
may rise well before the clinical onset of
diabetes (e.g., changes in FPG and 2-h PG
can occur about 6 months before diagno-
sis) (46), making diagnosis feasible well
before the onset of DKA. Three distinct
stages of type 1 diabetes have been de-
ﬁned (Table 2.3) and serve as a frame-
work for research and regulatory decision-
making (40,47).
There is debate as to whether slowly
progressive autoimmune diabetes with
an adult onset should be termed latent
autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA) or
type 1 diabetes. The clinical priority with
detection of LADA is awareness that slow
autoimmune b-cell destruction can occur
in adults, leading to a long duration of
marginal insulin secretory capacity. For
this classiﬁcation, all forms of diabetes
mediated by autoimmune b-cell destruc-
tion independent of age of onset are
included under the rubric of type 1 dia-
betes. Use of the term LADA is common
and acceptable in clinical practice and has
the practical impact of heightening aware-
ness of a population of adults likely to
have progressive autoimmune b-cell de-
struction (48), thus accelerating insulin ini-
tiation prior to deterioration of glucose
management or development of DKA
(34,49). At the same time, there is evi-
dence that application of only a single im-
perfect autoantibody test for determining
LADA classiﬁcation may lead to misclassi-
ﬁcation of some individuals with type 2
diabetes. Diagnostic accuracy may be
improved by utilizing higher-speciﬁcity
tests, conﬁrmatory testing for other auto-
antibodies, and restricting testing to those
with clinical features suggestive of autoim-
mune diabetes (50).
The paths to b-cell demise and dysfunc-
tion are less well deﬁned in type 2 diabe-
tes, but deﬁcient b-cell insulin secretion,
frequently in the setting of insulin resistance,
appears to be the common denominator.
Type 2 diabetes is associated with insulin
secretory defects related to genetic predis-
position, epigenetic changes, inﬂammation,
and metabolic stress. Future classiﬁcation
schemes for diabetes will likely focus on
the pathophysiology of the underlying
b-cell dysfunction (40,51–54).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
S23
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

TYPE 1 DIABETES
Recommendations
2.6 Screening for presymptomatic type 1
diabetes may be done by detection of
autoantibodies to insulin, glutamic acid
decarboxylase (GAD), islet antigen 2
(IA-2), or zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8). B
2.7 Having multiple conﬁrmed islet
autoantibodies is a risk factor for clini-
cal diabetes. Testing for dysglycemia
may be used to further forecast near-
term risk. When multiple islet autoanti-
bodies are identiﬁed, referral to a spe-
cialized center for further evaluation
and/or consideration of a clinical trial
or approved therapy to potentially de-
lay development of clinical diabetes
should be considered. B
2.8 Standardized islet autoantibody
tests are recommended for classiﬁca-
tion of diabetes in adults who have
phenotypic risk factors that overlap
with those for type 1 diabetes (e.g.,
younger age at diagnosis, unintentional
weight loss, ketoacidosis, or short time
to insulin treatment). E
Immune-Mediated Diabetes
Autoimmune type 1 diabetes accounts for
5–10% of diabetes and is caused by auto-
immune destruction of the pancreatic
b-cells. Autoimmune markers include islet
cell autoantibodies and autoantibodies to
glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) (such
as GAD65), insulin, the tyrosine phospha-
tases islet antigen 2 (IA-2) and IA-2b, and
zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8). Numerous clini-
cal studies are being conducted to test
various methods of preventing or delaying
type 1 diabetes in those with evidence of
islet autoimmunity (trialnet.org/our-research/
prevention-studies) (42–44,49,55,56).The
disease has strong HLA associations, with
linkage to the DQB1 and DRB1 haplo-
types, and genetic screening has been
used in some research studies to identify
high-risk populations. Speciﬁc alleles in
these genes can be either predisposing
(e.g., DRB1*0301-DQB1*0201 [DR3-DQ2]
and DRB1*0401-DQB1*0302 [DR4-DQ8])
or protective (e.g., DRB1*1501 and DQA1*
0102-DQB1*0602). Stage 1 of type 1 diabe-
tes is deﬁned by the presence of two or
more of these autoantibodies and normo-
glycemia. At stage 1, the 5-year risk of de-
veloping symptomatic type 1 diabetes is
44% overall but varies considerably
based on number, titer, and speciﬁcity of
autoantibodiesaswellasage ofseroconver-
sion and genetic risk (47). Stage 2 includes
individuals with multiple islet autoantibod-
ies and dysglycemia. At stage 2 of the dis-
ease, there is 60% risk by 2 years and
75% risk within 5 years of developing
symptomatic type 1 diabetes (57,58).
The rate of b-cell destruction is quite
variable, being rapid in some individuals
(particularly but not exclusively in infants
and children) and slow in others (mainly
but not exclusively adults) (46,59). Children
and adolescents often present with DKA
as the ﬁrst manifestation of the disease,
and rates in the U.S. have increased dra-
matically over the past 20 years (30–32).
Others have modest fasting hyperglycemia
that can rapidly change to severe hypergly-
cemia and/or DKA with infection or other
stress. Adults may retain sufﬁcient b-cell
function to prevent DKA for many years;
such individuals may have remission or
decreased insulin needs for months or
years, eventually become dependent on
insulin for survival, and are at risk for DKA
(33–35,60,61). At this later stage of the
disease, there is little or no insulin secre-
tion, as manifested by low or undetectable
levels of plasma C-peptide. Immune-
mediated diabetes is the most com-
mon form of diabetes in childhood and
adolescence, but it can occur at any
age.
Autoimmune destruction of b-cells has
multiple genetic factors and is also re-
lated to environmental factors that are
still poorly deﬁned. Although individuals
do not typically have obesity when they
present with type 1 diabetes, obesity is
increasingly common in the general pop-
ulation; as such, obesity should not pre-
clude testing for type 1 diabetes. People
with type 1 diabetes are also prone to
other autoimmune disorders, such as
Hashimoto thyroiditis, Graves disease, ce-
liac disease, Addison disease, vitiligo, au-
toimmune hepatitis, myasthenia gravis,
and pernicious anemia (see Section 4,
“Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and
Assessment of Comorbidities”). Type 1 di-
abetes can be associated with monogenic
polyglandular autoimmune syndromes,
including immune dysregulation, polyen-
docrinopathy, enteropathy, and X-linked
(IPEX) syndrome, which is an early-onset
systemic autoimmune, genetic disorder
caused by mutation of the forkhead box
protein 3 (FOXP3) gene, and another dis-
order caused by the autoimmune regula-
tor (AIRE) gene mutation (62,63).
Introduction of immunotherapy, specif-
ically checkpoint inhibitors, for cancer
treatment has led to unexpected adverse
events, including immune system activa-
tion precipitating autoimmune disease.
Fulminant onset of type 1 diabetes can
occur, with DKA and low or undetectable
levels of C-peptide as a marker of endoge-
nous b-cell function (64–66). Fewer than
Table 2.3—Staging of type 1 diabetes
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Characteristics
 Autoimmunity
 Autoimmunity
 Autoimmunity
 Normoglycemia
 Dysglycemia
 Overt hyperglycemia
 Presymptomatic
 Presymptomatic
 Symptomatic
Diagnostic criteria
 Multiple islet
autoantibodies
 No IGT or IFG
 Islet autoantibodies (usually multiple)
 Dysglycemia: IFG and/or IGT
 FPG 100–125 mg/dL (5.6–6.9 mmol/L)
 2-h PG 140–199 mg/dL (7.8–11.0 mmol/L)
 A1C 5.7–6.4% (39–47 mmol/mol) or $10%
increase in A1C
 Autoantibodies may become absent
 Diabetes by standard criteria
Adapted from Skyler et al. (40). FPG, fasting plasma glucose; IFG, impaired fasting glucose; IGT, impaired glucose tolerance; 2-h PG, 2-h plasma
glucose. Alternative additional stage 2 diagnostic criteria of 30-, 60-, or 90-min plasma glucose on oral glucose tolerance test $200 mg/dL
($11.1 mmol/L) and conﬁrmatory testing in those aged $18 years have been used in clinical trials (79).
S24
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Type 1 
diabetes
Indeterminate9
Consider repeat 
C-peptide at >5 years
Type 2 
diabetes
Genetic testing for 
monogenic diabetes 
where available6
Are there features of 
type 2 diabetes?5
Test C-peptide4
Are there features of monogenic diabetes?3
Islet autoantibody negative
(5-10% of adult-onset type 1 diabetes)
Islet autoantibody positive
Type 1 diabetes
Age
Unclear classiﬁcation7
Make clinical decision as to 
how person with diabetes 
should be treated
Trial of noninsulin therapy may 
8
Consider C-peptide4 test after 
>3 years duration
>35 years
Yes
No
<200 pmol/L
200-600 pmol/L
>600 pmol/L
<200 pmol/L
>200 pmol/L
No
Test islet autoantibodies2
<35 years
Yes
Adult with suspected type 1 diabetes1
Flow chart for investigation of suspected type 1 diabetes in newly 
diagnosed adults, based on data from White European populations
Figure 2.1—Flowchart for investigation of suspected type 1 diabetes in newly diagnosed adults, based on data from White European populations. 1No sin-
gle clinical feature conﬁrms type 1 diabetes in isolation. 2Glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) should be the primary antibody measured and, if negative,
should be followed by islet tyrosine phosphatase 2 (IA-2) and/or zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8) where these tests are available. In individuals who have not
been treated with insulin, antibodies against insulin may also be useful. In those diagnosed at <35 years of age who have no clinical features of type 2 dia-
betes or monogenic diabetes, a negative result does not change the diagnosis of type 1 diabetes, since 5–10% of people with type 1 diabetes do not have
antibodies. 3Monogenic diabetes is suggested by the presence of one or more of the following features: A1C <58 mmol/mol (<7.5%) at diagnosis, one
parent with diabetes, features of a speciﬁc monogenic cause (e.g., renal cysts, partial lipodystrophy, maternally inherited deafness, and severe insulin resis-
tance in the absence of obesity), and monogenic diabetes prediction model probability >5% (diabetesgenes.org/exeter-diabetes-app/ModyCalculator).
4A C-peptide test is only indicated in people receiving insulin treatment. A random sample (with concurrent glucose) within 5 h of eating can replace a for-
mal C-peptide stimulation test in the context of classiﬁcation. If the result is $600 pmol/L ($1.8 ng/mL), the circumstances of testing do not matter. If
the result is <600 pmol/L (<1.8 ng/mL) and the concurrent glucose is <4 mmol/L (<70 mg/dL) or the person may have been fasting, consider repeating
the test. Results showing very low levels (e.g., <80 pmol/L [<0.24 ng/mL]) do not need to be repeated. Where a person is insulin treated, C-peptide
must be measured prior to insulin discontinuation to exclude severe insulin deﬁciency. Do not test C-peptide within 2 weeks of a hyperglycemic emer-
gency. 5Features of type 2 diabetes include increased BMI ($25 kg/m2), absence of weight loss, absence of ketoacidosis, and less marked hyperglycemia.
Less discriminatory features include non-White ethnicity, family history, longer duration and milder severity of symptoms prior to presentation, features
of the metabolic syndrome, and absence of a family history of autoimmunity. 6If genetic testing does not conﬁrm monogenic diabetes, the classiﬁcation
is unclear and a clinical decision should be made about treatment. 7Type 2 diabetes should be strongly considered in older individuals. In some cases, in-
vestigation for pancreatic or other types of diabetes may be appropriate. 8A person with possible type 1 diabetes who is not treated with insulin will re-
quire careful monitoring and education so that insulin can be rapidly initiated in the event of glycemic deterioration. 9C-peptide values 200–600 pmol/L
(0.6–1.8 ng/mL) are usually consistent with type 1 diabetes or maturity-onset diabetes of the young but may occur in insulin-treated type 2 diabetes, par-
ticularly in people with normal or low BMI or after long duration. Reprinted and adapted from Holt et al. (36).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
S25
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

half of these individuals have autoanti-
bodies that are seen in type 1 diabetes,
supporting alternate pathobiology. This
immune-related adverse event occurs in
just under 1% of checkpoint inhibitor–
treated individuals but most commonly
occurs with agents that block the pro-
grammed cell death protein 1/programmed
cell death ligand 1 pathway alone or in com-
bination with other checkpoint inhibitors
(67). To date, the majority of immune
checkpoint inhibitor–related cases of type 1
diabetes occur in people with high-risk
HLA-DR4 (present in 76% of individuals),
whereas other high-risk HLA alleles are not
more common than those in the general
population (67).To date, risk cannot be pre-
dicted by family history or autoantibodies,
so all health care professionals administering
these medications or caring for people who
have a history of current or past exposure to
these agents should be mindful of this ad-
verse effect and educate and monitor indi-
viduals appropriately.
A numberof viruses have been associated
with type 1 diabetes, including enteroviruses
such as Coxsackievirus B. During the corona-
virus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic,
cases of hyperglycemia, DKA, and new
diabetes increased, suggesting that severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) is a trigger for or can unmask
type 1 diabetes (68). Possible mechanisms
of b-cell damage include virus-triggered
b-cell death, immune-mediated loss of
pancreatic b-cells, and damage to b-cells
because of infection of surrounding exo-
crine cells. The cytokine storm associated
with COVID-19 infection is a highly inﬂam-
matory state that could also contribute.To
better characterize and understand the
pathogenesis of new-onset COVID-19–re-
lated diabetes, a global registry, CoviDIAB,
has been established (69).
Idiopathic Type 1 Diabetes
Some forms of type 1 diabetes have no
known etiologies. Individuals have per-
manent insulinopenia and are prone to
DKA but have no evidence of b-cell auto-
immunity. However, only a minority of
people with type 1 diabetes fall into this
category.
Individuals with autoantibody-negative
diabetes of African or Asian ancestry may
suffer from episodic DKA and exhibit vary-
ing degrees of insulin deﬁciency between
episodes (70). This form of diabetes is
usually considered a form of type 2
diabetes (ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes),
is strongly inherited, and is not HLA asso-
ciated. An absolute requirement for insu-
lin
replacement
therapy
in
affected
individuals may be intermittent. Future
research is needed to determine the
cause of b-cell dysfunction/destruction in
this rare clinical scenario.
Screening for Type 1 Diabetes Risk
The incidence and prevalence of type 1 di-
abetes are increasing (71). People with
type 1 diabetes often present with acute
symptoms of diabetes and markedly ele-
vated blood glucose levels, and 25–50%
are diagnosed with life-threatening DKA
(30–32). Multiple studies indicate that
measuring islet autoantibodies in relatives
of those with type 1 diabetes (47) or in
children from the general population
(72,73) can effectively identify those who
will develop type 1 diabetes. A study re-
ported the risk of progression to type 1 di-
abetes from the time of seroconversion to
autoantibody positivity in three pediatric
cohorts from Finland, Germany, and the
U.S. Of the 585 children who developed
more than two autoantibodies, nearly
70% developed type 1 diabetes within
10 years and 84% within 15 years (42).
These ﬁndings are highly signiﬁcant, be-
cause while the German group was re-
cruited from offspring of parents with
type 1 diabetes, the Finnish and American
groups were recruited from the general
population. Remarkably, the ﬁndings in all
three groups were the same, suggesting
that the same sequence of events led to
clinical disease in both “sporadic” and fa-
milial cases of type 1 diabetes. Indeed,
the risk of type 1 diabetes increases as
the number of relevant autoantibodies
detected increases (55,74,75). In The
Environmental Determinants of Diabetes
in the Young (TEDDY) study, type 1 diabe-
tes developed in 21% of 363 subjects
with at least one autoantibody at 3 years
of age (76). Such testing, coupled with
education about diabetes symptoms and
close follow-up, has been shown to en-
able earlier diagnosis and to prevent
DKA (77,78).
Several screening programs are available
in Europe (e.g., Fr1da and gppad.org) and
the U.S. (e.g., trialnet.org, askhealth.org,
and cascadekids.org). Family history of
autoimmune diabetes and personal or
family history of allergic diseases or other
autoimmune diseases increases the risk of
autoimmune diabetes compared with the
general
population
(78,79).
Individuals
who test autoantibody positive should be
provided with or referred for counseling
about the risk of developing diabetes, dia-
betes symptoms, and DKA prevention and
should be given consideration for addi-
tional testing as applicable to help deter-
mine if they meet criteria for intervention
aimed at delaying progression.
PREDIABETES AND TYPE 2
DIABETES
Recommendations
2.9 Screening for prediabetes and
type 2 diabetes with an assessment
of risk factors or validated risk calcula-
tor should be done in asymptomatic
adults. B
2.10a Testing for prediabetes or type 2
diabetes in asymptomatic people should
be considered in adults of any age with
overweight or obesity who have one
or more risk factors (Table 2.4). B
2.10b For all other people, screening
should begin at age 35 years. B
2.11 If tests are normal, repeat screen-
ing recommended at a minimum of
3-year intervals is reasonable, sooner
with symptoms or change in risk (e.g.,
weight gain). C
2.12 To screen for prediabetes and
type 2 diabetes, FPG, 2-h PG during
75-g OGTT, and A1C are each appro-
priate (Table 2.1 and Table 2.2). B
2.13 When using OGTT as a screen for
prediabetes or diabetes, adequate car-
bohydrate intake (at least 150 g/day)
should be assured for 3 days prior to
testing. A
2.14 Risk-based screening for predia-
betes or type 2 diabetes should be con-
sidered after the onset of puberty or
after 10 years of age, whichever occurs
earlier, in children and adolescents
with overweight (BMI $85th percen-
tile) or obesity (BMI $95th percentile)
and who have one or more risk factors
for diabetes. (See Table 2.5 for evi-
dence grading of risk factors.) B
2.15a Consider screening people for
prediabetes or diabetes if on certain
medications, such as glucocorticoids,
statins, thiazide diuretics, some HIV
S26
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

medications, and second-generation
antipsychotic medications, as these
agents are known to increase the risk
of these conditions. E
2.15b In people who are prescribed
second-generation antipsychotic medi-
cations, screen for prediabetes and
diabetes at baseline and repeat 12–16
weeks after medication initiation or soon-
er, ifclinically indicated, and annually. B
2.16
People with HIV should be
screened for diabetes and prediabetes
with an FPG test before starting antire-
troviral therapy, at the time of switching
antiretroviral therapy, and 3–6 months
after starting or switching antiretroviral
therapy. If initial screening results are
normal, FPG should be checked annu-
ally. E
Prediabetes
Prediabetes is the term used for individ-
uals whose glucose or A1C levels do not
meet the criteria for diabetes yet have
abnormal carbohydrate metabolism that
results in elevated glucose levels (dysgly-
cemia) intermediate between normogly-
cemia and diabetes (28,80). People with
prediabetes are deﬁned by the presence
of IFG and/or IGT and/or A1C 5.7–6.4%
(39–47 mmol/mol) (Table 2.2). As predi-
abetes is an intermediate state between
normoglycemia and diabetes, it is clearly
a signiﬁcant risk factor for progression to
diabetes as well as cardiovascular disease
and several other cardiometabolic out-
comes. Criteria for screening for diabetes
or prediabetes in asymptomatic adults are
outlined in Table 2.4. Prediabetes is asso-
ciated with obesity (especially abdominal
or visceral obesity), dyslipidemia with high
triglycerides and/or low HDL cholesterol,
and hypertension.The presence of predi-
abetes should prompt comprehensive
screening for cardiovascular risk factors.
Diagnosis of Prediabetes
IFG is deﬁned as FPG levels from 100 to
125 mg/dL (from 5.6 to 6.9 mmol/L)
(78,79) and IGT as 2-h PG levels during
75-g OGTT from 140 to 199 mg/dL (from
7.8 to 11.0 mmol/L) (10). It should be
noted that the World Health Organization
and a number of diabetes organizations
deﬁne the IFG lower limit at 110 mg/dL
(6.1 mmol/L).The ADA also initially endorsed
this IFG lower limit in 1997 (10). However, in
2003 the ADA adopted the new range of
100–125 mg/dL (5.6–6.9 mmol/L) to better
deﬁne IFG so that the population risk of de-
veloping diabetes with IFG would be similar
to that with IGT (11).
As with the glucose measures, several
prospective studies that used A1C to pre-
dict the progression to diabetes as deﬁned
by A1C criteria demonstrated a strong,
continuous association between A1C and
subsequent diabetes. In a systematic re-
view of 44,203 individuals from 16 cohort
studies with a follow-up interval averaging
5.6 years (range 2.8–12 years), those with
A1C between 5.5% and 6.0% (between 37
and 42 mmol/mol) had a substantially in-
creased risk of diabetes (5-year incidence
from 9% to 25%).Those with an A1C range
of 6.0–6.5% (42–48 mmol/mol) had a
5-year risk of developing diabetes be-
tween 25% and 50% and a relative risk
20 times higher than that with A1C of
5.0% (31 mmol/mol) (81). In a commu-
nity-based study of African American
and non-Hispanic White adults without
diabetes, baseline A1C was a stronger
predictor of subsequent diabetes and
cardiovascular events than fasting glu-
cose (82). Other analyses suggest that
A1C of 5.7% (39 mmol/mol) or higher is
associated with a diabetes risk similar
to that of the high-risk participants in the
Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) (83),
and A1C at baseline was a strong pre-
dictor of the development of glucose-
deﬁned diabetes during the DPP and
its follow-up (7).
Table 2.4—Criteria for screening for diabetes or prediabetes in asymptomatic
adults
1. Testing should be considered in adults with overweight or obesity (BMI $25 kg/m2 or $23 kg/m2
in Asian American individuals) who have one or more of the following risk factors:
 First-degree relative with diabetes
 High-risk race and ethnicity (e.g., African American, Latino, Native American, Asian
American, Paciﬁc Islander)
 History of cardiovascular disease
 Hypertension ($130/80 mmHg or on therapy for hypertension)
 HDL cholesterol level <35 mg/dL (<0.9 mmol/L) and/or a triglyceride level >250 mg/dL
(>2.8 mmol/L)
 Individuals with polycystic ovary syndrome
 Physical inactivity
 Other clinical conditions associated with insulin resistance (e.g., severe obesity,
acanthosis nigricans)
2. People with prediabetes (A1C $5.7% [$39 mmol/mol], IGT, or IFG) should be tested yearly.
3. People who were diagnosed with GDM should have lifelong testing at least every 3 years.
4. For all other people, testing should begin at age 35 years.
5. If results are normal, testing should be repeated at a minimum of 3-year intervals, with
consideration of more frequent testing depending on initial results and risk status.
6. People with HIV, exposure to high-risk medicines, history of pancreatitis
GDM, gestational diabetes mellitus; IFG, impaired fasting glucose; IGT, impaired glucose tolerance.
Table 2.5—Risk-based screening for type 2 diabetes or prediabetes in
asymptomatic children and adolescents in a clinical setting
Screening should be considered in youth* who have overweight ($85th percentile) or
obesity ($95th percentile) A and who have one or more additional risk factors based
on the strength of their association with diabetes:
 Maternal history of diabetes or GDM during the child’s gestation A
 Family history of type 2 diabetes in ﬁrst- or second-degree relative A
 Race and ethnicity (e.g., Native American, African American, Latino, Asian American,
Paciﬁc Islander) A
 Signs of insulin resistance or conditions associated with insulin resistance (acanthosis
nigricans, hypertension, dyslipidemia, polycystic ovary syndrome, or small-for-gestational-
age birth weight) B
GDM, gestational diabetes mellitus. *After the onset of puberty or after 10 years of age, which-
ever occurs earlier. If tests are normal, repeat testing at a minimum of 3-year intervals (or more
frequently if BMI is increasing or risk factor proﬁle is deteriorating) is recommended. Reports of
type 2 diabetes before age 10 years exist, and this can be considered with numerous risk factors.
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
S27
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

An
A1C
range
of
5.7–6.4%
(39–
47 mmol/mol) identiﬁes a group of indi-
viduals at high risk for diabetes and car-
diovascular outcomes. Similar to those
with IFG and/or IGT, individuals with A1C
of 5.7–6.4% (39–47 mmol/mol) should be
informed of their increased risk for diabe-
tes and cardiovascular disease and coun-
seled about effective strategies to lower
their risks (see Section 3, “Prevention
or Delay of Diabetes and Associated
Comorbidities”). Similar to glucose meas-
urements, the continuum of risk is contin-
uous: as A1C rises, the diabetes risk rises
disproportionately (81). Aggressive inter-
ventions and vigilant follow-up should
be pursued for those considered at very
high risk (e.g., those with A1C >6.0%
[>42 mmol/mol] and individuals with
both IFG and IGT).
Table 2.4 outlines the criteria for
screening for prediabetes. The ADA risk
test is an additional option for assess-
ment to determine the appropriateness
of screening for diabetes or prediabetes
in asymptomatic adults (Fig. 2.2) (online
at diabetes.org/socrisktest). For additional
background regarding risk factors and
screening for prediabetes, see SCREENING
AND TESTING FOR PREDIABETES AND TYPE 2 DIABETES IN
ASYMPTOMATIC ADULTS and SCREENING AND TESTING
FOR PREDIABETES AND TYPE 2 DIABETES IN CHILDREN
AND ADOLESCENTS, below. For details regard-
ing individuals with prediabetes most
likely to beneﬁt from a formal behavioral
or lifestyle intervention, see Section 3,
“Prevention or Delay of Diabetes and
Associated Comorbidities.”
Type 2 Diabetes
Type 2 diabetes accounts for 90–95% of
all diabetes. This form encompasses indi-
viduals who generally have relative (rather
than absolute) insulin deﬁciency and have
peripheral insulin resistance (i.e., decreased
biological response to insulin).
There are various causes of type 2 dia-
betes. Although the speciﬁc etiologies
are not known, autoimmune destruction
of b-cells does not occur, and individuals
do not have any of the other known
causes of diabetes. Most, but not all,
people with type 2 diabetes have over-
weight or obesity. Excess weight itself
causes some degree of insulin resistance.
Individuals who do not have obesity or
overweight by traditional weight criteria
may have an increased percentage of
body fat distributed predominantly in
the abdominal region, including sites in-
volved in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
(also known as metabolic dysfunction-
associated steatotic liver disease) and/or
ectopic sites (e.g., skeletal muscle).
DKA seldom occurs spontaneously in
type 2 diabetes; when seen, it usually
arises in individuals already treated with in-
sulin (e.g., missed or inadequate doses), in
people with ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes,
in association with the stress of another ill-
ness such as infection (e.g., COVID-19) or
myocardial infarction, or in association with
illicit drug use (e.g., cocaine) or with the use
of certain medications such as glucocorti-
coids, second-generation antipsychotics, or
sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors
(84,85).Type 2 diabetes frequently goes un-
diagnosed for many years, because hyper-
glycemia develops gradually and, at earlier
stages, is often not severe enough for the
individual to notice the classic diabetes
symptoms caused by hyperglycemia, such
as dehydration or unintentional weight
loss. Nevertheless, even undiagnosed peo-
ple with diabetes are at increased risk of
developing macrovascular and microvascu-
lar complications.
People with type 2 diabetes early in
the disease course may have insulin levels
that appear normal or elevated, yet the
failure to normalize blood glucose reﬂects
a relative defect in glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion that is insufﬁcient to
compensate for insulin resistance. Insu-
lin resistance may improve with weight
reduction, physical activity, and/or phar-
macologic treatment of hyperglycemia
but is seldom restored to normal. Recent
interventions with intensive diet and exer-
cise, newer pharmacological agents (e.g.,
glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists),
or surgical weight loss have led to diabe-
tes remission (86–92) (see Section 8,
“Obesity and Weight Management for
the Prevention and Treatment of Type 2
Diabetes”).
The risk of developing type 2 diabetes
increases with age, obesity, and lack of
physical activity (93,94). It occurs more
frequently in individuals with prediabetes,
prior gestational diabetes mellitus, or poly-
cystic ovary syndrome. It is also more com-
mon in people with hypertension or
dyslipidemia and in certain racial and eth-
nic subgroups (e.g., African American, Na-
tive American, Hispanic/Latino, and Asian
American). It is often associated with a
strong genetic predisposition or family his-
tory in ﬁrst-degree relatives (more so than
type 1 diabetes). However, the genetics of
type 2 diabetes are poorly understood and
under intense investigation in this era of
precision medicine (52). In adults without
traditional risk factors for type 2 diabetes
and/or of younger age, consider islet auto-
antibody testing (e.g., GAD autoantibod-
ies) to exclude the diagnosis of type 1
diabetes (36) (Fig. 2.1).
Screening and Testing for
Prediabetes and Type 2 Diabetes in
Asymptomatic Adults
Screening for prediabetes and type 2 dia-
betes risk through a targeted assessment
of risk factors (Table 2.4) or with an
assessment tool, such as the ADA risk
test (Fig. 2.2) (online at diabetes.org/
socrisktest), is recommended to guide
health care professionals on whether
performing a diagnostic test (Table 2.1)
is appropriate. Prediabetes and type 2
diabetes meet criteria for conditions in
which early detection via screening is ap-
propriate. Both conditions are common
and impose signiﬁcant clinical and public
health burdens.There is often a long pre-
symptomatic phase before the diagnosis
of type 2 diabetes. Simple tests to detect
preclinical disease are readily available
(95). The duration of glycemic burden is
a strong predictor of adverse outcomes.
There are effective interventions that pre-
vent progression from prediabetes to dia-
betes. It is important to individualize
risk-to-beneﬁt ratio of formal intervention
for people with prediabetes and consider
person-centered goals. Risk models have
explored the beneﬁt, in general ﬁnding
higher beneﬁt of intervention in those at
highest risk (96) (see Section 3, “Prevention
or Delay of Diabetes and Associated
Comorbidities”) and reduce the risk of dia-
betes complications (97) (see Section 10,
“Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Man-
agement,” Section 11, “Chronic Kidney
Disease and Risk Management,” and Sec-
tion 12, “Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and
Foot Care”). In the most recent National In-
stitutes of Health (NIH) Diabetes Preven-
tion Program Outcomes Study (DPPOS)
report, prevention of progression from pre-
diabetes to diabetes (98) resulted in lower
rates of developing retinopathy and ne-
phropathy (99). Similar impact on diabe-
tes complications was reported with
screening, diagnosis, and comprehensive
risk factor management in the U.K. Clini-
cal Practice Research Datalink database
(97). In that report, progression from
S28
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

prediabetes to diabetes augmented risk
of complications.
Despitethenumerousbeneﬁtsofscreen-
ing and early diagnosis for prediabetes or
diabetes, unfortunately many people in the
U.S. and globallyeither remain undiagnosed
or are diagnosed late, when complications
have already arisen.
Additional
considerations regarding
testing for type 2 diabetes and prediabe-
tes in asymptomatic individuals are de-
scribed below.
®
American 
Diabetes
Association®
Are you at risk for type 2 diabetes?
Connected for Life
Diabetes Risk Test:
1. How old are you? ...................................................
2. Are you a man or a woman? .................................
3. If you are a woman, have you ever been 
    diagnosed with gestational diabetes?..................
Less than 40 years (0 points)
40–49 years (1 point)
50–59 years (2 points)
60 years or older (3 points)
4. Do you have a mother, father, sister or brother
    with diabetes? ........................................................
5. Have you ever been diagnosed with high 
    blood pressure? .....................................................
6. Are you physically active? ....................................
7. What is your weight category? .............................
See chart at right.
You are at increased risk for having type 2 diabetes. 
However, only your doctor can tell for sure if you do 
have type 2 diabetes or prediabetes, a condition in 
which blood glucose levels are higher than normal 
but not yet high enough to be diagnosed as diabetes. 
Talk to your doctor to see if additional testing is needed.
Type 2 diabetes is more common in African Americans, 
Hispanics/Latinos, Native Americans, Asian Americans, 
and Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders.
Higher body weight increases diabetes risk for everyone. 
Asian Americans are at increased diabetes risk at lower 
body weight than the rest of the general public (about 15 
pounds lower).
If you scored 5 or higher:
Lower Your Risk
The good news is you can manage your 
risk for type 2 diabetes. Small steps make 
a big difference in helping you live a longer, 
healthier life.
If you are at high risk, your first step is to 
visit your doctor to see if additional testing 
is needed.
Visit diabetes.org or call 1-800-DIABETES 
(800-342-2383) for information, tips on 
getting started, and ideas for simple, small 
steps you can take to help lower your risk.
Adapted from Bang et al., Ann Intern Med
151:775–783, 2009  •   Original algorithm was validated 
without gestational diabetes as part of the model.
Man (1 point)
Woman (0 points)
Yes (1 point)
No (0 points)
Yes (1 point)
No (0 points)
Yes (1 point)
No (0 points)
Yes (0 points)
No (1 point)
Learn more at diabetes.org/risktest
| 1-800-DIABETES (800-342-2383)
Diabetes Risk Test |
American Diabetes Association®
If you weigh less than the amount in
the left column: 0 points
4’ 10”
4’ 11”
5’ 0”
5’ 1”
5’ 2”
5’ 3”
5’ 4”
5’ 5”
5’ 6”
5’ 7”
5’ 8”
5’ 9”
5’ 10”
5’ 11”
6’ 0”
6’ 1”
6’ 2”
6’ 3”
6’ 4”
119–142
143–190
191+
124–147
148–197
198+
128–152
153–203
204+
132–157
158–210
211+
136–163
164–217
218+
141–168
169–224
225+
145–173
174–231
232+
150–179
180–239
240+
155–185
186–246
247+
159–190
191–254
255+
164–196
197–261
262+
169–202
203–269
270+
174–208
209–277
278+
179–214
215–285
286+
184–220
221–293
294+
189–226
227–301
302+
194–232
233–310
311+
200–239
240–318
319+
205–245
246–327
328+
WRITE YOUR SCORE
IN THE BOX.
ADD UP
YOUR SCORE.
Height
Weight (lbs.)
1 point
2 points
3 points
Figure 2.2—ADA risk test (diabetes.org/socrisktest).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
S29
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Age
Age is a major risk factor for diabetes.
Testing should begin at no later than age
35 years for all people (100). Screening
should be considered in adults of any
age with overweight or obesity and one
or more risk factors for diabetes.
Medications
Certain medications, such as glucocorti-
coids, statins (101), proprotein convertase
subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) inhibitors,
thiazide diuretics, some HIV medications
(19), and second-generation antipsychotic
medications (102), should be considered
when deciding whether to screen for pre-
diabetes or diabetes, as these medica-
tions are known to increase the risks of
these conditions.
For example, people taking second-
generation antipsychotic medications,
such as olanzapine, require greater mon-
itoring because of an increase in risk of
type 2 diabetes associated with this
medication (102). There is a range of ef-
fects on metabolic parameters (e.g., glu-
cose concentration, hyperglycemia, and
weight gain) across second-generation
antipsychotic medications; aripiprazole
and ziprasidone tend to have fewer met-
abolic effects, and haloperidol, cloza-
pine, quetiapine, and risperidone tend
to have more metabolic effects. People
treated with these agents should be
screened for prediabetes or diabetes at
baseline, rescreened 12–16 weeks after
medication initiation, and screened an-
nually thereafter (102).
People With HIV
People with HIV are at higher risk for de-
veloping prediabetes and diabetes on
antiretroviral (ARV) therapies; a screen-
ing protocol is therefore recommended
(103). The A1C test may underestimate
glycemia in people with HIV; it is not rec-
ommended for diagnosis and may present
challenges for monitoring (20). In those
with prediabetes, weight loss through
healthy nutrition and physical activity may
reduce the progression toward diabetes.
Among people with HIV and diabetes, pre-
ventive health care using an approach
used in people without HIV is critical to re-
duce the risks of microvascular and macro-
vascular complications. Diabetes risk is
increased with certain protease inhibitors
(PIs) and nucleoside/nucleotide reverse
transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs). New-onset
diabetes is estimated to occur in more
than 5% of individuals infected with HIV
on PIs, whereas more than 15% may have
prediabetes (104).
PIs are associated with insulin resis-
tance and may also lead to apoptosis of
pancreatic b-cells. NRTIs also affect fat
distribution (both lipohypertrophy and
lipoatrophy), which is associated with in-
sulin resistance. For people with HIV and
ARV-associated hyperglycemia, it may be
appropriate to consider discontinuing
the problematic ARV agents if safe and
effective alternatives are available (105).
Before making ARV substitutions, care-
fully consider the possible effect on HIV
virological control and the potential ad-
verse effects of new ARV agents. In some
cases, antihyperglycemic agents may still
be necessary.
Testing Interval
The appropriate interval between screen-
ing tests is not known (106). The rationale
for the 3-year interval is that with this inter-
val, the number of false-positive tests that
require conﬁrmatory testing will be re-
duced, and individuals with false-negative
tests will be retested before substantial
time elapses and complications develop
(106). In especially high-risk individuals,
particularly with weight gain, shorter
intervals between screenings may be
useful.
Community Screening
Ideally, screening should be carried out
within a health care setting because of
the need for follow-up and treatment.
Community screening outside a health
care setting is generally not recom-
mended because people with positive
tests may not seek, or have access to,
appropriate follow-up testing and care.
However, in speciﬁc situations where an
adequate referral system is established
beforehand for positive tests, commu-
nity screening may be considered. Com-
munity screening may also be poorly
targeted; i.e., it may fail to reach the
groups most at risk and inappropriately
test those at very low risk or even those
who
have
already
been
diagnosed
(107).
Screening in Dental Practices
Because periodontal disease is associ-
ated with diabetes, the utility of screen-
ing in a dental setting and referral to
primary care as a means to improve the
diagnosis of prediabetes and diabetes
has been explored (108–110), with one
study estimating that 30% of individuals
$30 years of age seen in general dental
practices (including people with and with-
out periodontal disease) had newly diag-
nosed dysglycemia (110). A similar study
in 1,150 dental patients >40 years old in
India reported 20.7% and 14.6% meeting
criteria for prediabetes and diabetes, re-
spectively, using random blood glucose
(111). Further research is needed to dem-
onstrate the feasibility, effectiveness,
and cost-effectiveness of screening in
this setting.
Screening and Testing for
Prediabetes and Type 2 Diabetes in
Children and Adolescents
The epidemiologic studies that formed
the basis for recommending A1C to diag-
nose diabetes included only adult popula-
tions (112). However, recent ADA clinical
guidance concluded that A1C, FPG, or 2-h
PG could be used to test for prediabetes
or type 2 diabetes in children and adoles-
cents (113).
In the last decade, the incidence and
prevalence of type 2 diabetes in children
and adolescents has increased dramati-
cally, especially in racial and ethnic mi-
nority populations (114). See Table 2.5
for
recommendations
on
risk-based
screening for type 2 diabetes or predia-
betes in asymptomatic children and
adolescents in a clinical setting (113).
See Table 2.1 and Table 2.2 for the cri-
teria for the diagnosis of diabetes and
prediabetes, respectively, that apply to
children, adolescents, and adults. See
Section 14, “Children and Adolescents,”
for additional information on type 2 diabetes
in children and adolescents.
PANCREATIC DIABETES OR
DIABETES IN THE CONTEXT OF
DISEASE OF THE EXOCRINE
PANCREAS
Recommendation
2.17 Screen people for diabetes within
3–6 months following an episode of
acute pancreatitis and annually there-
after. Screening for diabetes is recom-
mended annually for people with
chronic pancreatitis. E
Pancreatic diabetes (also termed pancrea-
togenic diabetes or type 3c diabetes) in-
cludes both structural and functional loss
of glucose-normalizing insulin secretion in
S30
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

the context of exocrine pancreatic dysfunc-
tion and is commonly misdiagnosed as
type 2 diabetes. The diverse set of etiolo-
gies
includes
pancreatitis
(acute
and
chronic), trauma or pancreatectomy, neo-
plasia, cystic ﬁbrosis (addressed later in this
section), hemochromatosis, ﬁbrocalculous
pancreatopathy, rare genetic disorders,
and idiopathic forms (2); as such, pancre-
atic diabetes is the preferred umbrella
term (115).
Pancreatitis, even a single bout, can lead
to postpancreatitis diabetes mellitus. Both
acute and chronic pancreatitis can lead to
postpancreatitis diabetes mellitus, and the
risk is highest with recurrent bouts. A dis-
tinguishing feature is concurrent pancreatic
exocrine insufﬁciency (consider screening
individuals with acute and chronic pancrea-
titis for exocrine pancreatic insufﬁciency
by measuring fecal elastase), pathological
pancreatic imaging (endoscopic ultrasound,
MRI, and computed tomography), and
absence of type 1 diabetes–associated
autoimmunity (116–120). There is loss
of both insulin and glucagon secretion
and often higher-than-expected insulin re-
quirements. Risk for microvascular compli-
cations appears to be similar to that of
other forms of diabetes.
For people with pancreatitis and dia-
betes, therapy should be advanced if
A1C goals are not met. Glucose-lowering
therapies associated with increased risk
of pancreatitis (i.e., incretin-based thera-
pies) should be avoided. Early initiation of
insulin therapy should be considered. In
the context of pancreatectomy, islet auto-
transplantation can be considered for se-
lected individuals with medically refractory
chronic pancreatitis in specialized centers
to preserve endogenous islet function and
insulin secretion (121,122). In some cases,
autotransplant can lead to insulin indepen-
dence. In others, it may decrease insulin
requirements (123).
Cystic Fibrosis–Related Diabetes
Recommendations
2.18
Annual screening for cystic
ﬁbrosis–related diabetes (CFRD) with
an OGTT should begin by age 10 years
in all people with cystic ﬁbrosis not
previously diagnosed with CFRD. B
2.19 A1C is not recommended as a
screening test for CFRD due to low sensi-
tivity. However, a value of $6.5%
($48 mmol/mol) is consistent with a di-
agnosis of CFRD. B
2.20 Beginning 5 years after the diag-
nosis of CFRD, annual monitoring for
complications of diabetes is recom-
mended. E
Cystic ﬁbrosis is a multisystem condition
arising from recessive mutations in the
gene encoding the cystic ﬁbrosis trans-
membrane conductance regulator (CFTR)
protein. Pancreatic exocrine damage ulti-
mately manifests as pancreatic exocrine
insufﬁciency that begins as early as in-
fancy (124). Cystic ﬁbrosis–related diabetes
(CFRD) is the most common comorbidity in
people with cystic ﬁbrosis, occurring in
about 20% of adolescents and 40–50% of
adults (125). The relevance of CFRD is
highlighted by its association with increased
morbidity, mortality, and patient burden.
Diabetes in this population, compared with
individuals with type 1 or type 2 diabetes, is
associated with worse nutritional status,
more severe inﬂammatory lung disease,
and greater mortality. Insulin insufﬁciency is
the primary defect in CFRD. Genetically
determined b-cell function and insulin re-
sistance associated with infection and in-
ﬂammation may also contribute to the
development of CFRD. Milder abnormali-
ties of glucose tolerance are even more
common and occur at earlier ages than
CFRD.Whether individuals with IGTshould
be treated with insulin replacement has
not currently been determined. Although
screening for diabetes before the age of
10 years can identify risk for progression
to CFRD in those with abnormal glucose
tolerance, no beneﬁt has been established
with respect to weight, height, BMI, or
lung function. OGTT is the recommended
screening test for CFRD. Not unexpectedly,
annual OGTTs are perceived as burden-
some, and adherence to current CFRD
screening guidelines is poor, with only
30% of adults with cystic ﬁbrosis having
annual OGTTs (126). A1C is not recom-
mended for screening due to low sensitivity;
however, a value $6.5% ($48 mmol/mol)
is consistent with a diagnosis of CFRD and
reduces patient screening burden (127–
129). Regardless of age, weight loss or fail-
ure of expected weight gain is a risk for
CFRD
and
should
prompt
screening
(127,128).The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Pa-
tient Registry (130) evaluated 3,553 people
with cystic ﬁbrosis and diagnosed 445
(13%) with CFRD. Early diagnosis and treat-
ment of CFRD was associated with preserva-
tion of lung function. The European Cystic
Fibrosis Society Patient Registry reported an
increase in CFRD with age (10% increase
per decade), genotype, decreased lung
function, and female sex (131,132). CGM or
HOMA of b-cell function (133) may be
more sensitive than OGTT to detect risk
for progression to CFRD; however, evi-
dence linking these results to long-term
outcomes is lacking, and these tests are
not recommended for screening outside
the research setting (134).
CFRD mortality has signiﬁcantly de-
creased over time, and the gap in mor-
tality between people with cystic ﬁbrosis
with and without diabetes has consider-
ably narrowed (135). There are limited
clinical trial data on therapy for CFRD.
People with CFRD should be treated with
insulin to attain individualized glycemic
goals.
Additional resources for the clinical
management of CFRD can be found in
the position statement “Clinical Care
Guidelines for Cystic Fibrosis–Related Di-
abetes” (136) and in the International Soci-
ety for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes
2018 clinical practice consensus guidelines
(125).
POSTTRANSPLANTATION
DIABETES MELLITUS
Recommendations
2.21 Afterorgan transplantation, screen-
ing for hyperglycemia should be done. A
formal diagnosis of posttransplantation
diabetes mellitus (PTDM) is best made
once the individual is stable on an immu-
nosuppressive plan and in the absence
of an acute infection. B
2.22 The OGTT is the preferred test
to make a diagnosis of PTDM. B
2.23 Immunosuppressive plans shown
to provide the best outcomes for indi-
viduals and graft survival should be
used, irrespective of PTDM risk. E
Several terms are used in the literature to
describe the presence of diabetes follow-
ing organ transplantation (137). New-
onset diabetes after transplantation
(NODAT) is one such designation that de-
scribes individuals who develop new-onset
diabetes following transplant. NODAT ex-
cludes people with pretransplant diabetes
that was undiagnosed as well as posttrans-
plant hyperglycemia that resolves by the
time of discharge (138). Another term,
posttransplantation diabetes mellitus
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
S31
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

(PTDM) (138,139), describes the pres-
ence of diabetes in the posttransplant
setting irrespective of the timing of diabe-
tes onset (140).The clinical importance of
PTDM lies in its unquestionable impact as
a signiﬁcant risk factor for cardiovascular
disease and chronic kidney disease in
solid-organ transplantation (137).
Hyperglycemia is very common during
the early posttransplant period, with
90% of kidney allograft recipients exhib-
iting hyperglycemia in the ﬁrst few weeks
following transplant (138,139,141,142).
In most cases, such stress- or steroid-
induced hyperglycemia resolves by the
time of discharge (142,143). Although the
use of immunosuppressive therapies is a
major contributor to the development of
PTDM, the risks of transplant rejection
outweigh the risks of PTDM, and the role
of the diabetes health care professional is
to treat hyperglycemia appropriately re-
gardless of the type of immunosuppres-
sion (138). Risk factors for PTDM include
both general diabetes risks (such as age,
family history of diabetes, obesity, etc.)
and transplant-speciﬁc factors, such as use
of immunosuppressant agents (144–146).
Whereas posttransplantation hyperglyce-
mia is an important risk factor for subse-
quent PTDM, a formal diagnosis of PTDM
is optimally made once the individual is
stable on maintenance immunosuppres-
sion (usually at least 45 days after trans-
plantation) and in the absence of acute
infection (138,142–144,147).
The OGTT is considered the gold-
standard test for the diagnosis of PTDM
(1 year posttransplant) (138,139,148,149).
Pretransplant elevation in hs-CRP was as-
sociated with PTDM in the setting of renal
transplant (150,151). However, screening
people with FPG and/or A1C can identify
high-risk individuals who require further
assessment and may reduce the number
of overall OGTTs required.
Few randomized controlled studies
have reported on the short- and long-
term use of antihyperglycemic agents in
the setting of PTDM (144,152,153). Most
studies have reported that transplant pa-
tients with hyperglycemia and PTDM after
transplantation have higher rates of rejec-
tion, infection, and rehospitalization (142,
144,154). Insulin therapy is the agent of
choice for the management of hyperglyce-
mia, PTDM, preexisting diabetes, and dia-
betes in the hospital setting and can be
continued postdischarge. No studies to
date have ﬁrmly established which nonin-
sulin agents are safest or most efﬁcacious
in PTDM. The choice of agent is usually
made based on the side effect proﬁle of the
medication, possible interactions with the in-
dividual’s immunosuppression plan, and po-
tential cardiovascular and renal beneﬁts in
individuals with PTDM (144). Well-designed
intervention trials examining the efﬁcacy
and safety of these and other antihyper-
glycemic agents in people with PTDM are
needed.
MONOGENIC DIABETES
SYNDROMES
Recommendations
2.24a Regardless of current age, all
people diagnosed with diabetes in the
ﬁrst 6 months of life should have im-
mediate genetic testing for neonatal
diabetes. A
2.24b Children and young adults who
do not have typical characteristics of
type 1 or type 2 diabetes and who of-
ten have a family history of diabetes in
successive generations (suggestive of an
autosomal dominant pattern of inheri-
tance) should have genetic testing for
maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY). A
2.24c In both instances, consultation
with a center specializing in diabetes
genetics is recommended to under-
stand the signiﬁcance of genetic muta-
tions and how best to approach
further evaluation, treatment, and ge-
netic counseling. E
Monogenic defects that cause b-cell dys-
function, such as neonatal diabetes and
MODY, are present in a small fraction of
people with diabetes (<5%) (155).Table 2.6
describes the most common causes of
monogenic diabetes. For a comprehen-
sive list of causes, see “Genetic Diagnosis
of Endocrine Disorders” (156).
Neonatal Diabetes
Diabetes occurring under 6 months of
age is termed neonatal or congenital dia-
betes, and about 80–85% of cases can be
found to have an underlying monogenic
cause (36,157–160). Neonatal diabetes
occurs much less often after 6 months of
age, whereas autoimmune type 1 diabe-
tes rarely occurs before 6 months of age.
Neonatal diabetes can either be transient
or permanent. Transient diabetes is most
often due to overexpression of genes on
chromosome 6q24, is recurrent in about
half of cases, and may be treatable with
medications other than insulin. Permanent
neonatal diabetes is most commonly due
to autosomal dominant mutations in
the genes encoding the Kir6.2 subunit
(KCNJ11) and SUR1 subunit (ABCC8) of the
b-cell KATP channel. A recent report details
a de novo mutation in EIF2B1 affecting
eIF2 signaling associated with permanent
neonatal diabetes and hepatic dysfunc-
tion, similar to Wolcott-Rallison syndrome
but with few severe comorbidities (161).
The recent ADA-European Association for
the Study of Diabetes type 1 diabetes con-
sensus report recommends that regardless
of current age, individuals diagnosed un-
der 6 months of age should have genetic
testing (36). Correct diagnosis has critical
implications, because 30–50% of people
with KATP-related neonatal diabetes will ex-
hibit improved blood glucose levels when
treated with high-dose oral sulfonylureas
instead of insulin. Insulin gene (INS) mu-
tations are the second most common
cause of permanent neonatal diabetes,
and while intensive insulin management
is currently the preferred treatment
strategy, there are important genetic
counseling considerations, as most of
the mutations that cause diabetes are
dominantly inherited.
Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the
Young
MODY is frequently characterized by onset
of hyperglycemia at an early age (classically
before age 25 years, although diagnosis
may occur at older ages). MODY is charac-
terized by impaired insulin secretion with
minimal or no defects in insulin action (in
the absence of coexistent obesity). It is in-
herited in an autosomal dominant pattern
with abnormalities in at least 13 genes on
different chromosomes identiﬁed to date
(162). The most commonly reported forms
are GCK-MODY (MODY2), HNF1A-MODY
(MODY3), and HNF4A-MODY (MODY1).
For individuals with MODY, the treatment
implications are considerable and warrant
genetic testing (163,164). Clinically, people
with GCK-MODY exhibit mild, stable fasting
hyperglycemia and do not require antihy-
perglycemic therapy, although it is com-
monly needed during pregnancy. Individu-
als with HNF1A-MODY or HNF4A-MODY
usually respond well to low doses of sulfo-
nylureas, which are considered ﬁrst-line
therapy; in some instances, insulin will
S32
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

be required over time. Mutations or dele-
tions in HNF1B are associated with renal
cysts and uterine malformations (renal
cysts and diabetes [RCAD] syndrome).
Other extremely rare forms of MODY
have been reported to involve other tran-
scription factor genes, including PDX1
(IPF1) and NEUROD1.
Diagnosis of Monogenic Diabetes
A diagnosis of one of the three most com-
mon forms of MODY, including HNF1A-
MODY, GCK-MODY, and HNF4A-MODY, al-
lows for more cost-effective personalized
therapy (i.e., no therapy for GCK-MODY
and sulfonylureas as ﬁrst-line therapy for
HNF1A-MODY and HNF4A-MODY). Addi-
tionally, diagnosis can lead to identiﬁca-
tion of other affected family members
and can indicate potential extrapancreatic
complications in affected individuals. Ge-
netic screening (i.e., next-generation se-
quencing) is increasingly available and
cost-effective (161,163).
A diagnosis of MODY should be consid-
ered in individuals who have atypical dia-
betes and multiple family members with
diabetes not characteristic of type 1 or
type 2 diabetes, although admittedly,
atypical diabetes is becoming increasingly
difﬁcult to precisely deﬁne in the absence
of a deﬁnitive set of tests for either type
of diabetes (158–160,163–169) (Fig. 2.1).
In most cases, the presence of autoanti-
bodies for type 1 diabetes precludes fur-
ther testing for monogenic diabetes, but
the presence of autoantibodies in people
with monogenic diabetes has been re-
ported (170). Individuals in whom mono-
genic diabetes is suspected should be
referred to a specialist for further evalua-
tion. Readily available commercial genetic
testing following the criteria listed below
now enables a cost-effective (170), often
cost-saving, genetic diagnosis that is in-
creasingly supported by health insurance. A
biomarker screening pathway, such as the
combination of urinary C-peptide/creatinine
ratio and antibody screening, may aid in de-
termining who should get genetic testing
for MODY (171). It is critical to correctly di-
agnose one of the monogenic forms of dia-
betes, because these individuals may be in-
correctly diagnosed with type 1 or type 2
diabetes, leading to suboptimal, even po-
tentially harmful, treatment plans and de-
lays in diagnosing other family members
(172). The correct diagnosis is especially
critical for those with GCK-MODY muta-
tions, where multiple studies have shown
that no complications ensue in the absence
of glucose-lowering therapy (173). It has
been reported that low hs-CRP can be
used in identifying those more likely to
have HNF1A-MODY as opposed to other
forms of diabetes, supporting genetic test-
ing in such individuals (174). The risks of
microvascular and macrovascular compli-
cations with HNF1A-MODY and HNF4A-
MODY are similar to those observed in
people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes
(175,176). Genetic counseling is recom-
mended to ensure that affected individu-
als understand the patterns of inheritance
and the importance of a correct diagnosis
and to address comprehensive cardiovas-
cular risk.
The diagnosis of monogenic diabetes
should be considered in children and
adults diagnosed with diabetes in early
adulthood with the following ﬁndings:
Table 2.6—Most common causes of monogenic diabetes
Gene
Inheritance
Clinical features
MODY
HNF1A
AD
HNF1A-MODY: progressive insulin secretory defect with presentation in adolescence
or early adulthood; lowered renal threshold for glucosuria; large rise in 2-h PG
level on OGTT (>90 mg/dL [>5 mmol/L]); sensitive to sulfonylureas
HNF4A
AD
HNF4A-MODY: progressive insulin secretory defect with presentation in
adolescence or early adulthood; may have large birth weight and
transient neonatal hypoglycemia; sensitive to sulfonylureas
HNF1B
AD
HNF1B-MODY: developmental renal disease (typically cystic); genitourinary
abnormalities; atrophy of the pancreas; hyperuricemia; gout
GCK
AD
GCK-MODY: higher glucose threshold (set point) for glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion, causing stable, nonprogressive elevated fasting blood glucose;
typically does not require treatment; microvascular complications are rare;
small rise in 2-h PG level on OGTT (<54 mg/dL [<3 mmol/L])
Neonatal diabetes
KCNJ11
AD
Permanent or transient: IUGR; possible developmental delay and seizures;
responsive to sulfonylureas
INS
AD
Permanent: IUGR; insulin requiring
ABCC8
AD
Permanent or transient: IUGR; rarely developmental delay; responsive to
sulfonylureas
6q24 (PLAGL1,
HYMA1)
AD for paternal
duplications
Transient: IUGR; macroglossia; umbilical hernia; mechanisms include
UPD6, paternal duplication, or maternal methylation defect; may be
treatable with medications other than insulin
GATA6
AD
Permanent: pancreatic hypoplasia; cardiac malformations; pancreatic
exocrine insufﬁciency; insulin requiring
EIF2AK3
AR
Permanent: Wolcott-Rallison syndrome: epiphyseal dysplasia; pancreatic
exocrine insufﬁciency; insulin requiring
EIF2B1
AD
Permanent diabetes: can be associated with ﬂuctuating liver function (157)
FOXP3
X-linked
Permanent: immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy
X-linked (IPEX) syndrome: autoimmune diabetes, autoimmune thyroid
disease, exfoliative dermatitis; insulin requiring
Adapted from Carmody et al. (156). AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; IUGR, intrauterine growth restriction; OGTT, oral glu-
cose tolerance test; UPD6, uniparental disomy of chromosome 6; 2-h PG, 2-h plasma glucose.
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
S33
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

• Diabetes diagnosed within the ﬁrst
6 months of life (with occasional cases
presenting later, mostly INS and ABCC8
mutations) (157,177)
• Diabetes without typical features of
type 1 or type 2 diabetes (negative di-
abetes-associated autoantibodies, no
obesity, and lacking other metabolic
features, especially with strong family
history of diabetes)
• Stable, mild fasting hyperglycemia
(100–150 mg/dL [5.6–8.5 mmol/L]),
stable A1C between 5.6% and 7.6%
(between 38 and 60 mmol/mol), es-
pecially if no obesity
GESTATIONAL DIABETES MELLITUS
Recommendations
2.25 In individuals who are planning
pregnancy, screen those with risk fac-
tors (Table 2.4) B and consider testing
all individuals of childbearing potential
for undiagnosed prediabetes or diabe-
tes. E
2.26a Before 15 weeks of gestation,
test
individuals
with
risk
factors
(Table 2.4) B and consider testing all
individuals E for undiagnosed diabetes
at the ﬁrst prenatal visit using standard
diagnostic criteria if not screened
preconception.
2.26b Before 15 weeks of gestation,
screen for abnormal glucose metab-
olism to identify individuals who are
at higher risk of adverse pregnancy
and neonatal outcomes, are more
likely to need insulin, and are at high
risk of a later gestational diabetes
mellitus (GDM) diagnosis. B Early
treatment for individuals with abnor-
mal glucose metabolism may pro-
vide some beneﬁt. E
2.26c Screen for early abnormal glu-
cose metabolism with dysglycemia us-
ing FPG of 110–125 mg/dL (6.1–6.9
mmol/L) or A1C 5.9–6.4% (41–47
mmol/mol). B
2.27 Screen for GDM at 24–28 weeks
of gestation in pregnant individuals
not previously found to have diabe-
tes or high-risk abnormal glucose
metabolism detected earlier in the
current pregnancy. A
2.28 Screen individuals with GDM for
prediabetes or diabetes at 4–12 weeks
postpartum, using the 75-g OGTT and
clinically appropriate nonpregnancy
diagnostic criteria. A
2.29 Individuals with a history of
GDM should have lifelong screening
for the development of prediabetes
or diabetes at least every 3 years. B
Deﬁnition
For many years, gestational diabetes melli-
tus (GDM) was deﬁned as any degree of
glucose intolerance that was ﬁrst recog-
nized during pregnancy (81), regardless of
the degree of hyperglycemia. This deﬁni-
tion facilitated a uniform strategy for detec-
tion and classiﬁcation of GDM, but this
deﬁnition has serious limitations (178).
First, the best available evidence reveals
that many cases of GDM represent pre-
existing hyperglycemia that is detected
by routine screening in pregnancy, as rou-
tine screening is not widely performed in
nonpregnant individuals of reproductive
age. It is the severity of hyperglycemia
that is clinically important regarding both
short- and long-term maternal and fetal
risks.
The ongoing epidemic of obesity and
diabetes has led to more type 2 diabetes
in people of reproductive age, with an in-
crease in the number of pregnant individ-
uals with undiagnosed type 2 diabetes in
early pregnancy (179–181). Ideally, un-
diagnosed diabetes should be identiﬁed
preconception in individuals with risk fac-
tors or in high-risk populations (182–187),
as the preconception care of people with
preexisting diabetes results in lower A1C
and reduced risk of birth defects, preterm
delivery, perinatal mortality, small-for-
gestational-age birth weight, and neona-
tal intensive care unit admission (188). If
individuals are not screened prior to
pregnancy, universal early screening at
<15 weeks of gestation for undiagnosed
diabetes may be considered over selec-
tive screening (Table 2.4), particularly in
populations with high prevalence of risk
factors and undiagnosed diabetes in
people of childbearing age. Strong racial
and ethnic disparities exist in the preva-
lence of undiagnosed diabetes. There-
fore, early screening provides an initial
step to identify these health disparities
so that they can begin to be addressed
(184–187). Standard diagnostic criteria
for identifying undiagnosed diabetes in
early pregnancy are the same as those
used in the nonpregnant population
(Table 2.1). Individuals found to have
diabetes by the standard diagnostic criteria
used outside of pregnancy should be classi-
ﬁed as having diabetes complicating preg-
nancy (most often type 2 diabetes, rarely
type 1 diabetes or monogenic diabetes) and
managed accordingly.
Early abnormal glucose metabolism,
deﬁned as a fasting glucose threshold
of 110 mg/dL (6.1 mmol/L) or an A1C
of 5.9% (41 mmol/mol), may identify
individuals who are at higher risk of
adverse pregnancy and neonatal out-
comes (preeclampsia, macrosomia, shoul-
der dystocia, and perinatal death), are
more likely to need insulin treatment,
and are at high risk of a later GDM diag-
nosis (189–194). An A1C threshold of
5.7% has not been shown to be associ-
ated with adverse perinatal outcomes
(195,196).
If early screening is negative, individuals
should be rescreened for GDM between 24
and 28 weeks of gestation (see Section 15,
“Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy”).
The International Association of the
Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Groups
(IADPSG) GDM diagnostic criteria for the
75-g OGTT, as well as the GDM screening
and diagnostic criteria used in the
two-step approach, were not derived
from data in the ﬁrst half of pregnancy
and should not be used for early screen-
ing (197). To date, most randomized con-
trolled
trials
of
treatment
of
early
abnormal glucose metabolism have been
underpowered for outcomes. A recent ran-
domized controlled trial performed at
17 centers administered early screening
(mean 15.6 ± 2.5 weeks) for GDM with a
75-g OGTT. Individuals who met World
Health Organization criteria for GDM were
randomized to receive early treatment or a
repeat OGTT at 24–28 weeks (with de-
ferred treatment if indicated). The ﬁrst pri-
mary outcome measure was an adverse
neonatal composite outcome including
birth <37 weeks, birth weight $4.5 kg,
birth trauma, neonatal respiratory distress
within 24 h of birth, phototherapy, stillbirth
neonatal death, or shoulder dystocia. Early
GDM treatment resulted in a signiﬁcant
but modest improvement in the composite
adverse neonatal outcome (24.9% early
treatment vs. 30.5% control, relative risk
0.82 [0.68–0.98]), with a suggestion of
more beneﬁt (per prespeciﬁed subgroup
analyses) among individuals who had
the OGTT at <14 weeks and among indi-
viduals with glycemic values in higher
ranges on their OGTTs (198). Therefore,
S34
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

the beneﬁts of treatment for early abnor-
mal glucose metabolism remain uncer-
tain. Nutrition counseling and periodic
“block” testing of glucose levels weekly
to identify individuals with high glucose
levels are suggested. Testing frequency
may proceed to daily, and treatment
may be intensiﬁed, if the FPG is pre-
dominantly >110 mg/dL (>6.1 mmol/L)
prior to 18 weeks of gestation.
Both the FPG and A1C are low-cost
tests. An advantage of the A1C test is its
convenience, as it can be added to the
prenatal laboratories and does not re-
quire an early-morning fasting appoint-
ment. Disadvantages include inaccuracies
in the presence of increased red blood
cell turnover and hemoglobinopathies
(usually reads lower) and higher values
with anemia and reduced red blood cell
turnover (199). A1C is not reliable for
screening for GDM or for preexisting diabe-
tes at 15 weeks of gestation or later; if the
ﬁrst screening takes place at this stage, one
cannot differentiate between preexisting
diabetes and GDM with an A1C.
GDM is often indicative of underlying
b-cell dysfunction (200), which confers
marked increased risk for later develop-
ment of diabetes, generally but not al-
ways type 2 diabetes, in the mother after
delivery (201,202). As effective preven-
tion interventions are available (203,204),
individuals diagnosed with GDM should
receive lifelong screening for prediabetes
to allow interventions to reduce diabetes
risk and for type 2 diabetes to allow treat-
ment at the earliest possible time (205).
Diagnosis
GDM carries risks for the mother, fetus,
and neonate.The Hyperglycemia and Ad-
verse Pregnancy Outcome (HAPO) study
(206), a large-scale multinational cohort
study completed by more than 23,000
pregnant individuals, demonstrated that
riskof adverse maternal, fetal, and neonatal
outcomes continuously increased as a func-
tion of maternal glycemia at 24–28 weeks
of gestation, even within ranges previ-
ously considered normal for pregnancy.
For most complications, there was no
threshold for risk. These results have led
to careful reconsideration of the diagnos-
tic criteria for GDM.
GDM diagnosis (Table 2.7) can be ac-
complished with either of two strategies:
1. The “one-step” 75-g OGTT derived
from the IADPSG criteria, or
2. The older “two-step” approach with a
50-g (nonfasting) screen followed by a
100-g OGTT for those who screen posi-
tive based on the work of Carpenter-
Coustan’s interpretation of the older
O’Sullivan and Mahan (207) criteria.
Different diagnostic criteria will identify
different degrees of maternal hyperglyce-
mia and maternal/fetal risk, leading some
experts to debate, and disagree on, opti-
mal strategies for the diagnosis of GDM.
One-Step Strategy
The IADPSG deﬁned diagnostic cut points
for GDM as the average fasting, 1-h, and
2-h PG values during a 75-g OGTT in indi-
viduals at 24–28 weeks of gestation who
participated in the HAPO study at which
odds for adverse outcomes reached 1.75
times the estimated odds of these outcomes
at the mean fasting, 1-h, and 2-h PG levels
of the study population. This one-step strat-
egy was anticipated to signiﬁcantly increase
the incidence of GDM (from 5–6% to
15–20%), primarily because only one abnor-
mal value, not two, became sufﬁcient to
make the diagnosis (208). Many regional
studies have investigated the impact of
adopting the IADPSG criteria on prevalence
and have seen a roughly one- to threefold
increase (209).The anticipated increase in
the incidence of GDM could have a sub-
stantial impact on costs and medical infra-
structure needs and has the potential to
“medicalize” pregnancies previously cate-
gorized as normal. A follow-up study of
individuals participating in a study of
pregnancy OGTTs with glucose levels
blinded to caregivers found that 11 years
after their pregnancies, individuals who
would have been diagnosed with GDM by
the one-step approach, as compared with
those without GDM, were at 3.4-fold
higher risk of developing prediabetes and
type 2 diabetes and had children with a
higher risk of obesity and increased body
fat, suggesting that the larger group of in-
dividuals identiﬁed as having GDM by the
one-step approach would beneﬁt from
the increased screening for diabetes and
prediabetes after pregnancy (210). The
ADA recommends the IADPSG diagnos-
tic criteria with the intent of optimizing
gestational outcomes, because these
criteria are the only ones based on
pregnancy outcomes rather than end
points such as prediction of subsequent
maternal diabetes.
The expected beneﬁts of using IADPSG
criteria to the offspring are inferred from
intervention trials that focused on individ-
uals with lower levels of hyperglycemia
than those identiﬁed using older GDM di-
agnostic criteria.Those trials found modest
beneﬁts, including reduced rates of large-
for-gestational-age births and preeclamp-
sia (211,212). It is important to note that
80–90% of participants being treated for
mild GDM in these two randomized con-
trolled trials could be managed with life-
style therapy alone. The OGTT glucose
cutoffs in these two trials overlapped the
thresholds recommended by the IADPSG,
and in one trial (212), the 2-h PG threshold
(140 mg/dL [7.8 mmol/L]) was lower than
the cutoff recommended by the IADPSG
(153 mg/dL [8.5 mmol/L]).
No randomized controlled trials of treat-
ing versus not treating GDM diagnosed by
the IADPSG criteria but not the Carpenter-
Coustan criteria have been published to
date. However, a recent randomized trial of
testing for GDM at 24–28 weeks of gesta-
tion by the one-step method using IADPSG
criteria versus the two-step method using a
1-h 50-g glucose loading test (GLT) and, if
positive, a 3-h OGTT by Carpenter-Coustan
criteria identiﬁed twice as many individuals
with GDM using the one-step method com-
pared with the two-step method. Despite
treating more individuals for GDM using
the one-step method, there was no differ-
ence in pregnancy and perinatal complica-
tions (213). However, concerns have been
raised about sample size estimates and un-
anticipated suboptimal engagement with
the protocol regarding screening and treat-
ment. For example, in the two-step group,
165 participants who did not get counted
as having GDM were treated for isolated
elevated FPG >95 mg/dL (>5.3 mmol/L)
(214). The high prevalence of prediabetes
in people of childbearing age may support
the more inclusive IADPSG criteria. National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES) data demonstrate a 21.5% prev-
alence of prediabetes in people of repro-
ductive age of 20–44 years, which is
comparable to or higher than the preva-
lence of GDM diagnosed by the one-step
method (215).
The one-step method identiﬁes the
long-term risks of maternal prediabetes
and diabetes and offspring abnormal
glucose metabolism and adiposity. Post
hoc GDM in individuals diagnosed by the
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
S35
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

one-step method in the HAPO cohort
was associated with higher prevalence
of IGT; higher 30-min, 1-h, and 2-h gluco-
ses during the OGTT; and reduced insulin
sensitivity and oral disposition index in
their offspring at 10–14 years of age com-
pared with offspring of mothers without
GDM. Associations of mother’s fasting, 1-
h, and 2-h values on the 75-g OGTT were
continuous with a comprehensive panel
of offspring metabolic outcomes (216,
217). In addition, HAPO Follow-up Study
(HAPO FUS) data demonstrate that neo-
natal adiposity and fetal hyperinsuline-
mia (cord C-peptide), both higher across
the continuum of maternal hyperglyce-
mia, are mediators of childhood body fat
(218).
Data are lacking on how the treat-
ment of mother’s hyperglycemia in
pregnancy affects her offspring’s risk
for obesity, diabetes, and other meta-
bolic
disorders
(219,220).
Additional
well-designed clinical studies are needed
to determine the optimal intensity of
monitoring and treatment of individuals
with GDM diagnosed by the one-step
strategy.
Two-Step Strategy
In 2013, the NIH convened a consensus
development conference to consider
diagnostic criteria for diagnosing GDM
(221). The 15-member panel had repre-
sentatives from obstetrics and gynecol-
ogy, maternal-fetal medicine, pediatrics,
diabetes research, biostatistics, and other
related ﬁelds. The panel recommended a
two-step approach to screening that used
a 1-h 50-g GLT followed by a 3-h 100-g
OGTT for those who screened positive.
The American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends
any of the commonly used thresholds of
130, 135, or 140 mg/dL for the 1-h 50-g
GLT (222). Updated from 2014, a 2021
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force sys-
tematic review continued to conclude
that one-step versus two-step screening
is associated with increased likelihood of
GDM (11.5% vs. 4.9%) but without im-
proved health outcomes. It reported that
the oral glucose challenge test using
thresholds of 140 or 135 mg/dL had sen-
sitivities of 82% and 93% and speciﬁcities
of 82% and 79%, respectively, against
Carpenter-Coustan criteria. FPG cutoffs of
85 mg/dL and 90 mg/dL had sensitivities
of 88% and 81% and speciﬁcities of 73%
and 82%, respectively, against Carpenter-
Coustan criteria (223). The use of A1C at
24–28 weeks of gestation as a screening
test for GDM does not function as well as
the GLT (224).
Key factors cited by the NIH panel in
their decision-making process were the
lack of clinical trial data demonstrating
the beneﬁts of the one-step strategy and
the potential negative consequences of
identifying a large group of individuals
with GDM, including medicalization of
pregnancy with increased health care uti-
lization and costs. Moreover, screening
with a 50-g GLT does not require fasting
and therefore is easier to accomplish for
many individuals. Treatment of higher-
threshold maternal hyperglycemia, as
identiﬁed by the two-step approach, re-
duces rates of neonatal macrosomia,
large-for-gestational-age births (225), and
shoulder dystocia without increasing small-
for-gestational-age births. ACOG currently
supports the two-step approach but notes
that one elevated value, as opposed to
two, may be used for the diagnosis of
GDM (222). If this approach is imple-
mented, the incidence of GDM by the
two-step strategy will likely increase
markedly. ACOG recommends either of
two sets of diagnostic thresholds for the
3-h 100-g OGTT Carpenter-Coustan or Na-
tional Diabetes Data Group (226,227).
Each is based on different mathematical
conversions of the original recommended
thresholds by O’Sullivan and Mahan (207),
which used whole blood and nonenzy-
matic methods for glucose determination.
A secondary analysis of data from a ran-
domized clinical trial of identiﬁcation and
treatment of mild GDM (228) demon-
strated that treatment was similarly bene-
ﬁcial in people meeting only the lower
thresholds per Carpenter-Coustan (226)
and in those meeting only the higher
thresholds per National Diabetes Data
Group (227). If the two-step approach is
used, it would appear advantageous to
use the Carpenter-Coustan lower diagnos-
tic thresholds, as shown in step 2 in
Table 2.7.
Future Considerations
The conﬂicting recommendations from
expert groups underscore the fact that
there are data to support each strategy. A
systematic review of economic evalua-
tions of GDM screening found that the
one-step method identiﬁed more cases
of GDM and was more likely to be cost-
effective than the two-step method (229).
The decision of which strategy to imple-
ment must therefore be made based on
the relative values placed on factors that
have yet to be measured (e.g., willingness
Table 2.7—Screening for and diagnosis of GDM
One-step strategy
Perform a 75-g OGTT, with plasma glucose measurement when an individual is fasting and at
1 and 2 h, at 24–28 weeks of gestation in individuals not previously diagnosed with diabetes.
The OGTT should be performed in the morning after an overnight fast of at least 8 h.
The diagnosis of GDM is made when any of the following plasma glucose values are met or
exceeded:
 Fasting: 92 mg/dL (5.1 mmol/L)
 1 h: 180 mg/dL (10.0 mmol/L)
 2 h: 153 mg/dL (8.5 mmol/L)
Two-step strategy
Step 1: Perform a 50-g GLT (nonfasting), with plasma glucose measurement at 1 h, at
24–28 weeks of gestation in individuals not previously diagnosed with diabetes.
If the plasma glucose level measured 1 h after the load is $130, 135, or 140 mg/dL (7.2,
7.5, or 7.8 mmol/L, respectively),* proceed to a 100-g OGTT.
Step 2: The 100-g OGTT should be performed when the individual is fasting.
The diagnosis of GDM is made when at least two† of the following four plasma glucose
levels (measured fasting and at 1, 2, and 3 h during OGTT) are met or exceeded
(Carpenter-Coustan criteria [226]):
 Fasting: 95 mg/dL (5.3 mmol/L)
 1 h: 180 mg/dL (10.0 mmol/L)
 2 h: 155 mg/dL (8.6 mmol/L)
 3 h: 140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L)
GDM, gestational diabetes mellitus; GLT, glucose load test; OGTT, oral glucose tolerance
test. *American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends any of the
commonly used thresholds of 130, 135, or 140 mg/dL for the 1-h 50-g GLT (222). †ACOG
notes that one elevated value can be used for diagnosis (222).
S36
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

to change practice based on correlation
studies rather than intervention trial re-
sults, available infrastructure, and impor-
tance of cost considerations).
The IADPSG criteria (one-step strategy)
have been adopted internationally as the
preferred approach. Data that compare
population-wide outcomes with one-step
versus two-step approaches have been
inconsistent to date (213,230–232). In ad-
dition, pregnancies complicated by GDM
per the IADPSG criteria, but not recog-
nized as such, have outcomes compara-
ble to pregnancies with diagnosed GDM
by the more stringent two-step criteria
(233,234). There remains strong consen-
sus that establishing a uniform approach
to diagnosing GDM will beneﬁt people
with GDM, caregivers, and policymakers.
Longer-term outcome studies are cur-
rently underway.
References
1. Sacks DB, Arnold M, Bakris GL, et al. Guidelines
and recommendations for laboratory analysis in the
diagnosis and management of diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes Care 2023;46:e151–e199
2. American Diabetes Association. Diagnosis and
classiﬁcation of diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care
2014;37(Suppl. 1):S81–S90
3. International Expert Committee. International
Expert Committee report on the role of the A1C
assay in the diagnosis of diabetes. Diabetes Care
2009;32:1327–1334
4. Meijnikman AS, De Block CEM, Dirinck E, et al.
Not performing an OGTT results in signiﬁcant
underdiagnosis of (pre)diabetes in a high risk
adult Caucasian population. Int J Obes 2017;41:
1615–1620
5. Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE,
et al.; Diabetes Prevention Program Research
Group. Reduction in the incidence of type 2
diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin.
N Engl J Med 2002;346:393–403
6. Tuomilehto J, Lindstr€om J, Eriksson JG, et al.;
Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study Group. Pre-
vention of type 2 diabetes mellitus by changes in
lifestyle among subjects with impaired glucose
tolerance. N Engl J Med 2001;344:1343–1350
7. Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.
HbA1c as a predictor of diabetes and as an
outcome in the diabetes prevention program: a
randomized clinical trial. Diabetes Care 2015;38:
51–58
8. Echouffo-Tcheugui JB, Selvin E. Prediabetes
and what it means: the epidemiological evidence.
Annu Rev Public Health 2021;42:59–77
9. Chadha C, Pittas AG, Lary CW, et al.; D2d
Research Group. Reproducibility of a prediabetes
classiﬁcation in a contemporary population.
Metabol Open 2020;6:100031
10. Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and
Classiﬁcation of Diabetes Mellitus. Report of the
Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and Classiﬁcation
of Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes Care 1997;20:1183–
1197
11. Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and
Classiﬁcation of Diabetes Mellitus. Report of the
Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and Classiﬁcation
of Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes Care 2003;26(Suppl. 1):
S5–S20
12. Klein KR, Walker CP, McFerren AL, Huffman
H, Frohlich F, Buse JB. Carbohydrate intake prior
to oral glucose tolerance testing. J Endocr Soc
2021;5:bvab049
13. Conn JW. Interpretation of the glucose
tolerance test. The necessity of a standard pre-
paratory diet. Am J Med Sci 1940;199:555–564
14. Wilkerson HL, Butler FK, Francis JO. The
effect of prior carbohydrate intake on the oral
glucose tolerance test. Diabetes 1960;9:386–391
15. Lenters-Westra E, Slingerland RJ. Six of eight
hemoglobin A1c point-of-care instruments do
not meet the general accepted analytical per-
formance criteria. Clin Chem 2010;56:44–52
16. Hirst JA, McLellan JH, Price CP, et al. Per-
formance of point-of-care HbA1c test devices:
implications for use in clinical practice—a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Clin Chem Lab Med
2017;55:167–180
17. Nathan DM, Grifﬁn A, Perez FM, Basque E,
Do L, Steiner B. Accuracy of a point-of-care
hemoglobin A1c assay. J Diabetes Sci Technol
2019;13:1149–1153
18. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
CLIA Brochures. Accessed 26 September 2023.
Available from https://www.cms.gov/Regulations
-and-Guidance/Legislation/CLIA/CLIA_Brochures
19. Eckhardt BJ, Holzman RS, Kwan CK, Baghdadi
J, Aberg JA. Glycated hemoglobin A(1c) as
screening for diabetes mellitus in HIV-infected
individuals. AIDS Patient Care STDS 2012;26:
197–201
20. Kim PS, Woods C, Georgoff P, et al. A1C
underestimates glycemia in HIV infection. Diabetes
Care 2009;32:1591–1593
21. Wheeler E, Leong A, Liu CT, et al.; EPIC-CVD
Consortium; EPIC-InterAct Consortium; Lifelines
Cohort
Study.
Impact
of
common
genetic
determinants of hemoglobin A1c on type 2
diabetes risk and diagnosis in ancestrally diverse
populations: a transethnic genome-wide meta-
analysis. PLoS Med 2017;14:e1002383
22. Bergenstal RM, Gal RL, Connor CG, et al.;
T1D Exchange Racial Differences Study Group.
Racial differences in the relationship of glucose
concentrations and hemoglobin A1c levels. Ann
Intern Med 2017;167:95–102
23. Herman WH, Ma Y, Uwaifo G, et al.; Diabetes
Prevention Program Research Group. Differences
in A1C by race and ethnicity among patients with
impaired glucose tolerance in the Diabetes
Prevention Program. Diabetes Care 2007;30:2453–
2457
24. Saaddine JB, Fagot-Campagna A, Rolka D,
et al. Distribution of HbA(1c) levels for children
and young adults in the U.S.: Third National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Dia-
betes Care 2002;25:1326–1330
25. Selvin
E,
Steffes
MW,
Ballantyne
CM,
Hoogeveen RC, Coresh J, Brancati FL. Racial
differences in glycemic markers: a cross-sectional
analysis of community-based data. Ann Intern
Med 2011;154:303–309
26. Landry LG, Ali N, Williams DR, Rehm HL,
Bonham VL. Lack of diversity in genomic databases
is a barrier to translating precision medicine
research into practice. Health Aff (Millwood) 2018;
37:780–785
27. Wojcik GL, Graff M, Nishimura KK, et al.
Genetic analyses of diverse populations improves
discovery for complex traits. Nature 2019;570:514–
518
28. Selvin E, Rawlings AM, Bergenstal RM,
Coresh J, Brancati FL. No racial differences in the
association of glycated hemoglobin with kidney
disease and cardiovascular outcomes. Diabetes
Care 2013;36:2995–3001
29. Selvin E, Wang D, Matsushita K, Grams ME,
Coresh J. Prognostic implications of single-sample
conﬁrmatory testing for undiagnosed diabetes: a
prospective cohort study. Ann Intern Med 2018;
169:156–164
30. Rewers A, Dong F, Slover RH, Klingensmith
GJ, Rewers M. Incidence of diabetic ketoacidosis
at diagnosis of type 1 diabetes in Colorado youth,
1998-2012. JAMA 2015;313:1570–1572
31. Alonso GT, Coakley A, Pyle L, Manseau K,
Thomas S, Rewers A. Diabetic ketoacidosis at
diagnosis of type 1 diabetes in Colorado children,
2010-2017. Diabetes Care 2020;43:117–121
32. Jensen ET, Stafford JM, Saydah S, et al.
Increase in prevalence of diabetic ketoacidosis at
diagnosis among youth with type 1 diabetes: the
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study. Diabetes
Care 2021;44:1573–1578
33. Humphreys A, Bravis V, Kaur A, et al.
Individual and diabetes presentation characteristics
associated with partial remission status in children
and adults evaluated up to 12 months following
diagnosis of type 1 diabetes: an ADDRESS-2 (After
Diagnosis Diabetes Research Support System-2)
study analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2019;155:
107789
34. Thomas NJ, Lynam AL, Hill AV, et al. Type 1
diabetes deﬁned by severe insulin deﬁciency
occurs after 30 years of age and is commonly
treated as type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia 2019;62:
1167–1172
35. Hope SV, Wienand-Barnett S, Shepherd M,
et al. Practical classiﬁcation guidelines for dia-
betes in patients treated with insulin: a cross-
sectional study of the accuracy of diabetes
diagnosis. Br J Gen Pract 2016;66:e315–e322
36. Holt RIG, DeVries JH, Hess-Fischl A, et al.The
management of type 1 diabetes in adults. A
consensus report by the American Diabetes
Association (ADA) and the European Association
for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care
2021;44:2589–2625
37. Zhong VW, Juhaeri J, Mayer-Davis EJ. Trends
in hospital admission for diabetic ketoacidosis in
adults with type 1 and type 2 diabetes in England,
1998-2013: a retrospective cohort study. Diabetes
Care 2018;41:1870–1877
38. Lawrence JM, Slezak JM, Quesenberry C,
et al. Incidence and predictors of type 1 diabetes
among younger adults aged 20-45 years: the
diabetes in young adults (DiYA) study. Diabetes
Res Clin Pract 2021;171:108624
39. Vellanki P, Umpierrez GE. Diabetic ketoacidosis:
a common debut of diabetes among African
Americans with type 2 diabetes. Endocr Pract
2017;23:971–978
40. Skyler JS, Bakris GL, Bonifacio E, et al.
Differentiation of diabetes by pathophysiology,
natural history, and prognosis. Diabetes 2017;66:
241–255
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
S37
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

41. Williams DM, Jones H, Stephens JW. Per-
sonalized type 2 diabetes management: an update
on
recent
advances
and
recommendations.
Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes 2022;15:281–295
42. Ziegler AG, Rewers M, Simell O, et al.
Seroconversion to multiple islet autoantibodies
and risk of progression to diabetes in children.
JAMA 2013;309:2473–2479
43. Ziegler
AG;
BABYDIAB-BABYDIET
Study
Group. Age-related islet autoantibody incidence
in offspring of patients with type 1 diabetes.
Diabetologia 2012;55:1937–1943
44. Parikka V, N€ant€o-Salonen K, Saarinen M,
et al. Early seroconversion and rapidly increasing
autoantibody concentrations predict prepubertal
manifestation of type 1 diabetes in children at
genetic risk. Diabetologia 2012;55:1926–1936
45. Krischer JP, Lynch KF, Schatz DA, et al.;
TEDDY Study Group. The 6 year incidence of
diabetes-associated autoantibodies in genetically
at-risk children: the TEDDY study. Diabetologia
2015;58:980–987
46. Bogun MM, Bundy BN, Goland RS, Greenbaum
CJ.
C-peptide
levels
in
subjects
followed
longitudinally before and after type 1 diabetes
diagnosis in TrialNet. Diabetes Care 2020;43:
1836–1842
47. Insel RA, Dunne JL, Atkinson MA, et al.
Staging presymptomatic type 1 diabetes: a
scientiﬁc statement of JDRF, the Endocrine
Society, and the American Diabetes Association.
Diabetes Care 2015;38:1964–1974
48. Zhu Y, Qian L, Liu Q, et al. Glutamic acid
decarboxylase
autoantibody
detection
by
electrochemiluminescence assay identiﬁes latent
autoimmune diabetes in adults with poor islet
function. Diabetes Metab J 2020;44:260–266
49. Lynam A, McDonald T, Hill A, et al.
Development and validation of multivariable
clinical diagnostic models to identify type 1
diabetes requiring rapid insulin therapy in adults
aged 18-50 years. BMJ Open 2019;9:e031586
50. Jones
AG,
McDonald
TJ,
Shields
BM,
Hagopian W, Hattersley AT. Latent autoimmune
diabetes of adults (LADA) is likely to represent a
mixed population of autoimmune (type 1) and
nonautoimmune (type 2) diabetes. Diabetes Care
2021;44:1243–1251
51. Lynam AL, Dennis JM, Owen KR, et al.
Logistic regression has similar performance to
optimised machine learning algorithms in a
clinical setting: application to the discrimination
between type 1 and type 2 diabetes in young
adults. Diagn Progn Res 2020;4:6
52. Chung WK, Erion K, Florez JC, et al. Precision
medicine in diabetes: a consensus report from
the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the
European Association for the Study of Diabetes
(EASD). Diabetes Care 2020;43:1617–1635
53. Gale EA. Declassifying diabetes. Diabetologia
2006;49:1989–1995
54. Schwartz SS, Epstein S, Corkey BE, Grant SF,
Gavin JR 3rd, Aguilar RB. The time is right for a
new classiﬁcation system for diabetes: rationale
and implications of the b-cell-centric classiﬁcation
schema. Diabetes Care 2016;39:179–186
55. Steck AK, Vehik K, Bonifacio E, et al.; TEDDY
Study Group. Predictors of progression from the
appearance of islet autoantibodies to early
childhood diabetes: The Environmental Determinants
of Diabetes in the Young (TEDDY). Diabetes Care
2015;38:808–813
56. McKeigue PM, Spiliopoulou A, McGurnaghan
S, et al. Persistent C-peptide secretion in type 1
diabetes and its relationship to the genetic
architecture of diabetes. BMC Med 2019;17:165
57. Sosenko JM, Palmer JP, Rafkin-Mervis L,
et al.; Diabetes Prevention Trial-Type 1 Study
Group. Incident dysglycemia and progression to
type 1 diabetes among participants in the Dia-
betes Prevention Trial-Type 1. Diabetes Care
2009;32:1603–1607
58. Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet Study Group. The
use of intermediate endpoints in the design of
type 1 diabetes prevention trials. Diabetologia
2013;56:1919–1924
59. Greenbaum CJ, Beam CA, Boulware D, et al.;
Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet Study Group. Fall in
C-peptide during ﬁrst 2 years from diagnosis:
evidence of at least two distinct phases from
composite Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet data. Diabetes
2012;61:2066–2073
60. Mishra R, Hodge KM, Cousminer DL, Leslie
RD, Grant SFA. A global perspective of latent
autoimmune diabetes in adults. Trends Endocrinol
Metab 2018;29:638–650
61. Buzzetti R, Zampetti S, Maddaloni E. Adult-
onset autoimmune diabetes: current knowledge
and implications for management. Nat Rev
Endocrinol 2017;13:674–686
62. Ben-Skowronek I. IPEX syndrome: genetics
and treatment options. Genes (Basel) 2021;12:12
63. Frommer L, Kahaly GJ. Autoimmune polyendo-
crinopathy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2019;104:4769–
4782
64. Smith CJ, Almodallal Y, Jatoi A. Rare adverse
events with programmed death-1 and programmed
death-1 ligand inhibitors: justiﬁcation and rationale
for a systematic review. Curr Oncol Rep 2021;23:86
65. Zhao Z, Wang X, Bao XQ, Ning J, Shang M,
Zhang D. Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome
induced by immune checkpoint inhibitors: a
systematic review. Cancer Immunol Immunother
2021;70:1527–1540
66. Chen X, Afﬁnati AH, Lee Y, et al. Immune
checkpoint inhibitors and risk of type 1 diabetes.
Diabetes Care 2022;45:1170–1176
67. Stamatouli AM, Quandt Z, Perdigoto AL,
et
al.
Collateral
damage:
insulin-dependent
diabetes induced with checkpoint inhibitors.
Diabetes 2018;67:1471–1480
68. Wang Y, Guo H,Wang G, Zhai J, Du B. COVID-19
as a trigger for type 1 diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2023;108:2176–2183
69. CoviDIAB Registry Project. CoviDIAB Registry.
Accessed 26 September 2023. Available from
https://covidiab.e-dendrite.com/
70. Balasubramanyam A, Nalini R, Hampe CS,
Maldonado M. Syndromes of ketosis-prone
diabetes mellitus. Endocr Rev 2008;29:292–302
71. Gregory GA, Robinson TIG, Linklater SE, et al.;
International Diabetes Federation Diabetes Atlas
Type 1 Diabetes in Adults Special Interest Group.
Global incidence, prevalence, and mortality of
type 1 diabetes in 2021 with projection to 2040: a
modelling study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2022;
10:741–760
72. McQueen RB, Geno Rasmussen C, Waugh K,
et al. Cost and cost-effectiveness of large-scale
screening for type 1 diabetes in Colorado.
Diabetes Care 2020;43:1496–1503
73. Ziegler AG, Kick K, Bonifacio E, et al.; Fr1da
Study Group.Yield of a public health screening of
children for islet autoantibodies in Bavaria,
Germany. JAMA 2020;323:339–351
74. Orban T, Sosenko JM, Cuthbertson D, et al.;
Diabetes Prevention Trial-Type 1 Study Group.
Pancreatic islet autoantibodies as predictors of
type 1 diabetes in the Diabetes Prevention Trial-
Type 1. Diabetes Care 2009;32:2269–2274
75. Sosenko JM, Skyler JS, Palmer JP, et al.;
Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet Study Group; Diabetes
Prevention Trial-Type 1 Study Group.The prediction
of type 1 diabetes by multiple autoantibody levels
and their incorporation into an autoantibody risk
score in relatives of type 1 diabetic patients.
Diabetes Care 2013;36:2615–2620
76. Jacobsen LM, Larsson HE, Tamura RN, et al.;
TEDDY Study Group. Predicting progression to
type 1 diabetes from ages 3 to 6 in islet
autoantibody positive TEDDY children. Pediatr
Diabetes 2019;20:263–270
77. Barker JM, Goehrig SH, Barriga K, et al.;
DAISY Study. Clinical characteristics of children
diagnosed with type 1 diabetes through intensive
screening and follow-up. Diabetes Care 2004;27:
1399–1404
78. Elding Larsson H, Vehik K, Gesualdo P, et al.;
TEDDY Study Group. Children followed in the
TEDDY study are diagnosed with type 1 diabetes
at an early stage of disease. Pediatr Diabetes
2014;15:118–126
79. Herold KC, Bundy BN, Long SA, et al.; Type 1
Diabetes TrialNet Study Group. An anti-CD3
antibody, teplizumab, in relatives at risk for type 1
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;381:603–613
80. Selvin E. Are there clinical implications of
racial differences in HbA1c? A difference, to be a
difference, must make a difference. Diabetes
Care 2016;39:1462–1467
81. Zhang X, Gregg EW,Williamson DF, et al. A1C
level and future risk of diabetes: a systematic
review. Diabetes Care 2010;33:1665–1673
82. Selvin E, Steffes MW, Zhu H, et al. Glycated
hemoglobin, diabetes, and cardiovascular risk in
nondiabetic adults. N Engl J Med 2010;362:800–
811
83. Ackermann RT, Cheng YJ,Williamson DF, Gregg
EW. Identifying adults at high risk for diabetes and
cardiovascular
disease
using
hemoglobin
A1c
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
2005-2006. Am J Prev Med 2011;40:11–17
84. Umpierrez
G,
Korytkowski
M.
Diabetic
emergencies—ketoacidosis,
hyperglycaemic
hyperosmolar state and hypoglycaemia. Nat
Rev Endocrinol 2016;12:222–232
85. Fadini GP, Bonora BM, Avogaro A. SGLT2
inhibitors and diabetic ketoacidosis: data from
the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System. Dia-
betologia 2017;60:1385–1389
86. Lean ME, Leslie WS, Barnes AC, et al. Primary
care-led weight management for remission of
type 2 diabetes (DiRECT): an open-label, cluster-
randomised trial. Lancet 2018;391:541–551
87. Taheri S, Zaghloul H, Chagoury O, et al. Effect
of intensive lifestyle intervention on bodyweight
and glycaemia in early type 2 diabetes (DIADEM-I):
an open-label, parallel-group, randomised controlled
trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2020;8:477–489
88. Lean MEJ, Leslie WS, Barnes AC, et al.
Durability
of
a
primary
care-led
weight-
management intervention for remission of type 2
diabetes: 2-year results of the DiRECTopen-label,
cluster-randomised trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
2019;7:344–355
S38
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

89. Roth AE, Thornley CJ, Blackstone RP. Out-
comes in bariatric and metabolic surgery: an
updated 5-year review. Curr Obes Rep 2020;
9:380–389
90. Conte C, Lapeyre-Mestre M, Hanaire H, Ritz
P. Diabetes remission and relapse after bariatric
surgery: a nationwide population-based study.
Obes Surg 2020;30:4810–4820
91. Yoshino M, Kayser BD, Yoshino J, et al. Effects
of diet versus gastric bypass on metabolic function
in diabetes. N Engl J Med 2020;383:721–732
92. Cresci B, Cosentino C, Monami M, Mannucci
E. Metabolic surgery for the treatment of type 2
diabetes: a network meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Diabetes Obes Metab 2020;22:
1378–1387
93. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
National Diabetes Statistics Report, 2020: Estimates
of Diabetes and Its Burden in the United States.
2020. Accessed 26 September 2023. Available from
https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pdfs/data/statistics/
national-diabetes-statistics-report.pdf
94. International Diabetes Federation. IDF Dia-
betes Atlas, 10th edition. Brussels, Belgium,
International Diabetes Federation, 2021. Accessed
26 September 2023. Available from https://www
.diabetesatlas.org/atlas/tenth-edition/
95. Bardenheier
BH,
Wu
WC,
Zullo
AR,
Gravenstein S, Gregg EW. Progression to diabetes
by baseline glycemic status among middle-aged
and older adults in the United States, 2006-2014.
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2021;174:108726
96. Sussman JB, Kent DM, Nelson JP, Hayward
RA. Improving diabetes prevention with beneﬁt
based tailored treatment: risk based reanalysis of
Diabetes Prevention Program. BMJ 2015;350:h454
97. Palladino R, Tabak AG, Khunti K, et al.
Association between pre-diabetes and microvascular
and macrovascular disease in newly diagnosed
type 2 diabetes. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care
2020;8:e001061
98. Perreault L, Pan Q, Aroda VR, et al.; Diabetes
Prevention Program Research Group. Exploring
residual risk for diabetes and microvascular
disease in the Diabetes Prevention Program
Outcomes Study (DPPOS). Diabet Med 2017;34:
1747–1755
99. Nathan DM, Bennett PH, Crandall JP, et al.;
Research Group. Does diabetes prevention translate
into reduced long-term vascular complications of
diabetes? Diabetologia 2019;62:1319–1328
100. Chung S, Azar KM, Baek M, Lauderdale DS,
Palaniappan LP. Reconsidering the age thresholds
for type II diabetes screening in the U.S. Am J
Prev Med 2014;47:375–381
101. Mansi IA, Sumithran P, Kinaan M. Risk of
diabetes with statins. BMJ 2023;381:e071727
102. American Diabetes Association; American
Psychiatric Association; American Association
of Clinical Endocrinologists; North American
Association for the Study of Obesity. Consensus
development conference on antipsychotic drugs
and obesity and diabetes. Diabetes Care 2004;27:
596–601
103. Schambelan M, Benson CA, Carr A, et al.;
International AIDS Society-USA. Management of
metabolic complications associated with antiretroviral
therapy for HIV-1 infection: recommendations of
an International AIDS Society-USA panel. J Acquir
Immune DeﬁcSyndr2002;31:257–275
104. Monroe
AK,
Glesby
MJ,
Brown
TT.
Diagnosing and managing diabetes in HIV-infected
patients: current concepts. Clin Infect Dis 2015;
60:453–462
105. Wohl DA, McComsey G, Tebas P, et al.
Current concepts in the diagnosis and management
of metabolic complications of HIV infection and its
therapy. Clin Infect Dis 2006;43:645–653
106. Johnson SL, Tabaei BP, Herman WH. The
efﬁcacy and cost of alternative strategies for
systematic screening for type 2 diabetes in the
U.S. population 45-74 years of age. Diabetes Care
2005;28:307–311
107. Tabaei BP, Burke R, Constance A, et al.
Community-based screening for diabetes in
Michigan. Diabetes Care 2003;26:668–670
108. Lalla E, Cheng B, Kunzel C, Burkett S,
Lamster IB. Dental ﬁndings and identiﬁcation of
undiagnosed hyperglycemia. J Dent Res 2013;92:
888–892
109. Lalla E, Kunzel C, Burkett S, Cheng B,
Lamster IB. Identiﬁcation of unrecognized dia-
betes and pre-diabetes in a dental setting. J Dent
Res 2011;90:855–860
110. Herman WH, Taylor GW, Jacobson JJ, Burke
R, Brown MB. Screening for prediabetes and type 2
diabetes in dental ofﬁces. J Public Health Dent
2015;75:175–182
111. Jadhav AN, Tarte PR, Puri SK. Dental clinic:
potential
source
of
high-risk
screening
for
prediabetes and type 2 diabetes. Indian J Dent
Res 2019;30:851–854
112. Cowie CC, Rust KF, Byrd-Holt DD, et al.
Prevalence of diabetes and high risk for diabetes
using A1C criteria in the U.S. population in 1988-
2006. Diabetes Care 2010;33:562–568
113. Arslanian S, Bacha F, Grey M, Marcus MD,
White NH, Zeitler P. Evaluation and management
of youth-onset type 2 diabetes: a position
statement by the American Diabetes Association.
Diabetes Care 2018;41:2648–2668
114. Dabelea D, Mayer-Davis EJ, Saydah S, et al.;
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study. Prevalence
of type 1 and type 2 diabetes among children
and adolescents from 2001 to 2009. JAMA
2014;311:1778–1786
115. Ewald N, Bretzel RG. Diabetes mellitus
secondary to pancreatic diseases (type 3c)—are
we neglecting an important disease? Eur J Intern
Med 2013;24:203–206
116. Hardt PD, Brendel MD, Kloer HU, Bretzel
RG. Is pancreatic diabetes (type 3c diabetes)
underdiagnosed and misdiagnosed? Diabetes
Care 2008;31(Suppl. 2):S165–S169
117. Woodmansey C, McGovern AP, McCullough
KA, et al. Incidence, demographics, and clinical
characteristics
of diabetes
of
the
exocrine
pancreas (type 3c): a retrospective cohort study.
Diabetes Care 2017;40:1486–1493
118. Makuc J. Management of pancreatogenic
diabetes: challenges and solutions. Diabetes
Metab Syndr Obes 2016;9:311–315
119. Andersen DK, Korc M, Petersen GM, et al.
Diabetes, pancreatogenic diabetes, and pancreatic
cancer. Diabetes 2017;66:1103–1110
120. Petrov
MS,
Basina
M.
Diagnosis
of
endocrine disease: diagnosing and classifying
diabetes in diseases of the exocrine pancreas. Eur
J Endocrinol 2021;184:R151–R163
121. Bellin MD, Gelrud A, Arreaza-Rubin G, et al.
Total pancreatectomy with islet autotransplantation:
summary of an NIDDK workshop. Ann Surg 2015;
261:21–29
122. Anazawa T, Okajima H, Masui T, Uemoto S.
Current state and future evolution of pancreatic
islet transplantation. Ann Gastroenterol Surg
2018;3:34–42
123. Quartuccio M, Hall E, Singh V, et al.
Glycemic predictors of insulin independence
after total pancreatectomy with islet auto-
transplantation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2017;
102:801–809
124. Putman MS, Norris AW, Hull RL, et al. Cystic
Fibrosis-Related Diabetes Workshop: research
priorities
spanning
disease
pathophysiology,
diagnosis, and outcomes. Diabetes Care 2023;46:
1112–1123
125. Moran A, Pillay K, Becker D, Granados A,
Hameed S, Acerini CL. ISPAD Clinical Practice
Consensus Guidelines 2018: management of
cystic ﬁbrosis-related diabetes in children and
adolescents. Pediatr Diabetes 2018;19(Suppl. 27):
64–74
126. Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Patient Registry
2021 Annual Data Report. Bethesda, MD, Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation, 2021. Accessed 26 September
2023. Available from https://www.cff.org/sites/
default/ﬁles/2021-11/Patient-Registry-Annual-Data-
Report.pdf
127. Gilmour JA. Response to the letter to the
editor from Dr. Boudreau et al, “Validation of a
stepwise approach using glycated hemoglobin
levels to reduce the number of required oral
glucose tolerance tests to screen for cystic
ﬁbrosis-related diabetes in adults.” Can J Diabetes
2019;43:163
128. Gilmour JA, Sykes J, Etchells E, Tullis E.
Cystic
ﬁbrosis-related
diabetes
screening
in
adults: a gap analysis and evaluation of accuracy
of glycated hemoglobin levels. Can J Diabetes
2019;43:13–18
129. Darukhanavala A, Van Dessel F, Ho J,
Hansen M, Kremer T, Alfego D. Use of hemoglobin
A1c to identify dysglycemia in cystic ﬁbrosis. PLoS
One 2021;16:e0250036
130. Franck Thompson E, Watson D, Benoit CM,
Landvik S, McNamara J. The association of
pediatric cystic ﬁbrosis-related diabetes screening
on clinical outcomes by center: a CF patient
registry study. J Cyst Fibros 2020;19:316–320
131. Olesen HV, Drevinek P, Gulmans VA, et al.;
ECFSPR Steering Group. Cystic ﬁbrosis related
diabetes in Europe: prevalence, risk factors and
outcome; Olesen et al. J Cyst Fibros 2020;19:321–
327
132. Prentice BJ, Chelliah A, Ooi CY, et al. Peak
OGTT glucose is associated with lower lung
function in young children with cystic ﬁbrosis. J
Cyst Fibros 2020;19:305–309
133. Mainguy C, Bellon G, Delaup V, et al.
Sensitivity and speciﬁcity of different methods
for cystic ﬁbrosis-related diabetes screening: is
the oral glucose tolerance test still the standard?
J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 2017;30:27–35
134. Ode KL, Moran A. New insights into cystic
ﬁbrosis-related diabetes in children. Lancet Dia-
betes Endocrinol 2013;1:52–58
135. Moran A, Pekow P, Grover P, et al.; Cystic
Fibrosis Related Diabetes Therapy Study Group.
Insulin therapy to improve BMI in cystic ﬁbrosis-
related diabetes without fasting hyperglycemia:
results of the cystic ﬁbrosis related diabetes
therapy trial. Diabetes Care 2009;32:1783–1788
136. Moran A, Brunzell C, Cohen RC, et al.; CFRD
Guidelines Committee. Clinical care guidelines for
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
S39
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

cystic ﬁbrosis-related diabetes: a position statement
of the American Diabetes Association and a clinical
practice guideline of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation,
endorsed by the Pediatric Endocrine Society. Dia-
betes Care 2010;33:2697–2708
137. Shivaswamy V, Boerner B, Larsen J. Post-
Transplant Diabetes Mellitus: Causes, Treatment,
and Impact on Outcomes. Endocr Rev 2016;37:
37–61
138. Sharif A, Hecking M, de Vries AP, et al.
Proceedings from an international consensus
meeting on posttransplantation diabetes mellitus:
recommendations and future directions. Am J
Transplant 2014;14:1992–2000
139. Hecking M, Werzowa J, Haidinger M, et al.;
European-New-Onset Diabetes After Transplantation
Working Group. Novel views on new-onset diabetes
after transplantation: development, prevention and
treatment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2013;28:550–566
140. Montero N, Oliveras L, Soler MJ, Cruzado
JM. Management of post-transplant diabetes
mellitus: an opportunity for novel therapeutics.
Clin Kidney J 2021;15:5–13
141. Ramirez SC, Maaske J, Kim Y, et al. The
association between glycemic control and clinical
outcomes after kidney transplantation. Endocr
Pract 2014;20:894–900
142. Thomas MC, Moran J, Mathew TH, Russ
GR, Rao MM. Early peri-operative hyperglycaemia
and renal allograft rejection in patients without
diabetes. BMC Nephrol 2000;1:1
143. Chakkera HA, Weil EJ, Castro J, et al.
Hyperglycemia during the immediate period
after kidney transplantation. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2009;4:853–859
144. Wallia A, Illuri V, Molitch ME. Diabetes care
after transplant: deﬁnitions, risk factors, and
clinical management. Med Clin North Am 2016;
100:535–550
145. Kim HD, Chang JY, Chung BH, et al. Effect
of Everolimus with low-dose tacrolimus on
development of new-onset diabetes after
transplantation
and
allograft
function
in
kidney transplantation: a multicenter, open-
label, randomized trial. Ann Transplant 2021;
26:e927984
146. Cheng CY, Chen CH, Wu MF, et al. Risk
factors in and long-term survival of patients with
post-transplantation diabetes mellitus: a retro-
spective cohort study. Int J Environ Res Public
Health 2020;17:4581
147. Gulsoy Kirnap N, Bozkus Y, Haberal M.
Analysis of risk factors for posttransplant dia-
betes
mellitus
after
kidney
transplantation:
single-center experience. Exp Clin Transplant
2020;18(Suppl. 1):36–40
148. Sharif A, Moore RH, Baboolal K. The use of
oral glucose tolerance tests to risk stratify for
new-onset diabetes after transplantation: an
underdiagnosed phenomenon. Transplantation
2006;82:1667–1672
149. Hecking M, Kainz A, Werzowa J, et al.
Glucose metabolism after renal transplantation.
Diabetes Care 2013;36:2763–2771
150. Grundman JB, Wolfsdorf JI, Marks BE. Post-
transplantation diabetes mellitus in pediatric
patients. Horm Res Paediatr 2020;93:510–518
151. Pham Vu T, Nguyen Thi Thuy D, Truong Quy
K, et al. Serum hs-CRP measured prior trans-
plantation predicts of new-onset diabetes after
transplantation in renal transplant recipients.
Transpl Immunol 2021;66:101392
152. Galindo RJ, Fried M, Breen T, Tamler R.
Hyperglycemia management in patients with
posttransplantation diabetes. Endocr Pract 2016;22:
454–465
153. Jenssen T, Hartmann A. Emerging treatments
for post-transplantation diabetes mellitus. Nat Rev
Nephrol 2015;11:465–477
154. Thomas MC, Mathew TH, Russ GR, Rao
MM, Moran J. Early peri-operative glycaemic
control and allograft rejection in patients with
diabetes mellitus: a pilot study. Transplantation
2001;72:1321–1324
155. Riddle MC, Philipson LH, Rich SS, et al.
Monogenic diabetes: from genetic insights to
population-based precision in care. Reﬂections
from a Diabetes Care editors’ expert forum.
Diabetes Care 2020;43:3117–3128
156. Carmody D, Stoy J, Greely SAW, Bell GI,
Philipson LH. Chapter 2. A clinical guide to
monogenic diabetes. In Genetic diagnosis of
endocrine disorders. 2nd ed.Weiss RE, Refetoff S,
Eds. Cambridge, MA, Academic Press, 2016,
p. 21–30
157. De Franco E, Flanagan SE, Houghton JA,
et al. The effect of early, comprehensive genomic
testing on clinical care in neonatal diabetes: an
international cohort study. Lancet 2015;386:957–
963
158. Sanyoura M, Letourneau L, Knight Johnson
AE, et al. GCK-MODY in the US Monogenic
Diabetes Registry: description of 27 unpublished
variants. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2019;151:231–
236
159. Carmody D, Naylor RN, Bell CD, et al. GCK-
MODY in the US National Monogenic Diabetes
Registry: frequently misdiagnosed and unnecessarily
treated. Acta Diabetol 2016;53:703–708
160. Timsit J, Saint-Martin C, Dubois-Laforgue D,
Bellanne-Chantelot C. Searching for maturity-
onset diabetes of the young (MODY): when and
what for? Can J Diabetes 2016;40:455–461
161. De Franco E, Caswell R, Johnson MB, et al.
De novo mutations in EIF2B1 affecting eIF2
signaling cause neonatal/early-onset diabetes
and transient hepatic dysfunction. Diabetes 2020;
69:477–483
162. Valkovicova
T,
Skopkova
M,
Stanik
J,
Gasperikova D. Novel insights into genetics and
clinics of the HNF1A-MODY. Endocr Regul 2019;53:
110–134
163. Awa WL, Schober E, Wiegand S, et al.
Reclassiﬁcation of diabetes type in pediatric
patients initially classiﬁed as type 2 diabetes
mellitus: 15 years follow-up using routine data
from the German/Austrian DPV database. Dia-
betes Res Clin Pract 2011;94:463–467
164. Shields
BM,
Hicks
S,
Shepherd
MH,
Colclough K, Hattersley AT, Ellard S. Maturity-
onset diabetes of the young (MODY): how many
cases are we missing? Diabetologia 2010;53:2504–
2508
165. Shepherd M, Shields B, Hammersley S,
et al.; UNITED Team. Systematic population
screening, using biomarkers and genetic testing,
identiﬁes 2.5% of the U.K. pediatric diabetes
population with monogenic diabetes. Diabetes
Care 2016;39:1879–1888
166. SEARCH Study Group. SEARCH for Diabetes
in Youth: a multicenter study of the prevalence,
incidence and classiﬁcation of diabetes mellitus
in youth. Control Clin Trials 2004;25:458–471
167. Pihoker C, Gilliam LK, Ellard S, et al.;
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study Group.
Prevalence, characteristics and clinical diagnosis
of maturity onset diabetes of the young due to
mutations in HNF1A, HNF4A, and glucokinase:
results from the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2013;98:4055–4062
168. Draznin B, Philipson LH, McGill JB. Atypical
Diabetes: Pathophysiology, Clinical Presentations,
and Treatment Options. Arlington, VA, American
Diabetes Association, 2018
169. Exeter Diabetes. MODY Probability Calculator.
Accessed 14 October 2022. Available from https://
www.diabetesgenes.org/exeter-diabetes-app/
ModyCalculator
170. Urbanova J, Rypackova B, Prochazkova Z,
et al. Positivity for islet cell autoantibodies in
patients with monogenic diabetes is associated
with later diabetes onset and higher HbA1c level.
Diabet Med 2014;31:466–471
171. Shields BM, Shepherd M, Hudson M, et al.;
UNITED study team. Population-based assessment
of a biomarker-based screening pathway to aid
diagnosis of monogenic diabetes in young-onset
patients. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1017–1025
172. Hattersley A, Bruining J, Shield J, Njolstad P,
Donaghue KC.The diagnosis and management of
monogenic diabetes in children and adolescents.
Pediatr Diabetes 2009;10(Suppl. 12):33–42
173. Rubio-Cabezas O, Hattersley AT, Njølstad
PR, et al.; International Society for Pediatric and
Adolescent Diabetes. ISPAD Clinical Practice
Consensus Guidelines 2014. The diagnosis and
management of monogenic diabetes in children
and adolescents. Pediatr Diabetes 2014;15(Suppl.
20):47–64
174. McDonald TJ, Shields BM, Lawry J, et al.
High-sensitivity CRP discriminates HNF1A-MODY
from other subtypes of diabetes. Diabetes Care
2011;34:1860–1862
175. Steele AM, Shields BM, Shepherd M, Ellard
S, Hattersley AT, Pearson ER. Increased all-cause
and cardiovascular mortality in monogenic
diabetes as a result of mutations in the HNF1A
gene. Diabet Med 2010;27:157–161
176. Anõk A, C¸atlõ G, Abacõ A, B€ober E.
Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY):
an update. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 2015;28:
251–263
177. Greeley SA, Naylor RN, Philipson LH, Bell
GI. Neonatal diabetes: an expanding list of genes
allows for improved diagnosis and treatment.
Curr Diab Rep 2011;11:519–532
178. Huvinen E, Koivusalo SB, Meinil€a J, et al.
Effects of a lifestyle intervention during pregnancy
and ﬁrst postpartum year: ﬁndings from the
RADIEL study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2018;103:
1669–1677
179. Feig DS, Hwee J, Shah BR, Booth GL,
Bierman AS, Lipscombe LL. Trends in incidence of
diabetes in pregnancy and serious perinatal
outcomes: a large, population-based study in
Ontario, Canada, 1996-2010. Diabetes Care 2014;
37:1590–1596
180. Peng TY, Ehrlich SF, Crites Y, et al. Trends
and racial and ethnic disparities in the prevalence
of pregestational type 1 and type 2 diabetes in
Northern California: 1996-2014. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2017;216:177.e1–177.e8
181. Jovanovic L, Liang Y, Weng W, Hamilton M,
Chen L, Wintfeld N. Trends in the incidence of
diabetes, its clinical sequelae, and associated
S40
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

costs in pregnancy. Diabetes Metab Res Rev
2015;31:707–716
182. Poltavskiy E, Kim DJ, Bang H. Comparison
of screening scores for diabetes and prediabetes.
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2016;118:146–153
183. Mission JF, Catov J, Deihl TE, Feghali M,
Scifres C. Early pregnancy diabetes screening and
diagnosis: prevalence, rates of abnormal test
results, and associated factors. Obstet Gynecol
2017;130:1136–1142
184. Cho NH, Shaw JE, Karuranga S, et al. IDF
Diabetes Atlas: global estimates of diabetes
prevalence for 2017 and projections for 2045.
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2018;138:271–281
185. Britton LE, Hussey JM, Crandell JL, Berry
DC, Brooks JL, Bryant AG. Racial/ethnic disparities
in diabetes diagnosis and glycemic control among
women of reproductive age. J Womens Health
(Larchmt) 2018;27:1271–1277
186. Robbins C, Boulet SL, Morgan I, et al.
Disparities in preconception health indicators—
behavioral risk factor surveillance system, 2013-
2015, and pregnancy risk assessment monitoring
system, 2013-2014. MMWR Surveill Summ 2018;
67:1–16
187. Yuen L, Wong VW, Simmons D. Ethnic
disparities in gestational diabetes. Curr Diab Rep
2018;18:68
188. Wahabi HA, Fayed A, Esmaeil S, et al.
Systematic review and meta-analysis of the
effectiveness of pre-pregnancy care for women
with
diabetes
for
improving maternal
and
perinatal outcomes. PLoS One 2020;15:e0237571
189. Zhu WW, Yang HX, Wei
YM,
et al.
Evaluation of the value of fasting plasma glucose
in the ﬁrst prenatal visit to diagnose gestational
diabetes mellitus in China. Diabetes Care 2013;
36:586–590
190. Ma~ne L, Flores-Le Roux JA, Gomez N, et al.
Association of ﬁrst-trimester HbA1c levels with
adverse pregnancy outcomes in different ethnic
groups. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2019;150:202–
210
191. Boe B, Barbour LA, Allshouse AA, Heyborne
KD.
Universal
early
pregnancy
glycosylated
hemoglobin A1c as an adjunct to Carpenter-
Coustan screening: an observational cohort
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 2019;1:24–32
192. Immanuel J, Simmons D. Screening and
treatment for early-onset gestational diabetes
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Curr Diab Rep 2017;17:115
193. Yefet E, Jeda E, Tzur A, Nachum Z. Markers
for undiagnosed type 2 diabetes mellitus during
pregnancy—a
population-based
retrospective
cohort study. J Diabetes 2020;12:205–214
194. Kattini R, Hummelen R, Kelly L. Early
gestational
diabetes
mellitus
screening
with
glycated hemoglobin: a systematic review. J Obstet
Gynaecol Can 2020;42:1379–1384
195. Chen L, Pocobelli G, Yu O, et al. Early
pregnancy
hemoglobin
A1C
and
pregnancy
outcomes: a population-based study. Am J Perinatol
2019;36:1045–1053
196. Osmundson SS, Zhao BS, Kunz L, et al. First
trimester hemoglobin A1c prediction of gestational
diabetes. Am J Perinatol 2016;33:977–982
197. McIntyre HD, Sacks DA, Barbour LA, et al.
Issues with the diagnosis and classiﬁcation of
hyperglycemia in early pregnancy. Diabetes Care
2016;39:53–54
198. Simmons D, Immanuel J, Hague WM, et al.;
TOBOGM Research Group.Treatment of gestational
diabetes mellitus diagnosed early in pregnancy. N
Engl J Med 2023;388:2132–2144
199. Cavagnolli G, Pimentel AL, Freitas PA, Gross
JL, Camargo JL. Factors affecting A1C in non-
diabetic individuals: review and meta-analysis.
Clin Chim Acta 2015;445:107–114
200. Buchanan TA, Xiang A, Kjos SL, Watanabe
R. What is gestational diabetes? Diabetes Care
2007;30(Suppl. 2):S105–S111
201. Noctor E, Crowe C, Carmody LA, et al.;
ATLANTIC-DIP Investigators. Abnormal glucose
tolerance post-gestational diabetes mellitus as
deﬁned by the International Association of Dia-
betes and Pregnancy Study Groups criteria. Eur J
Endocrinol 2016;175:287–297
202. Kim C, Newton KM, Knopp RH. Gestational
diabetes and the incidence of type 2 diabetes: a
systematic review. Diabetes Care 2002;25:1862–
1868
203. Ratner RE, Christophi CA, Metzger BE,
et al.; Diabetes Prevention Program Research
Group. Prevention of diabetes in women with a
history of gestational diabetes: effects of met-
formin and lifestyle interventions. J Clin Endo-
crinol Metab 2008;93:4774–4779
204. Aroda VR, Christophi CA, Edelstein SL,
et al.; Diabetes Prevention Program Research
Group. The effect of lifestyle intervention and
metformin on preventing or delaying diabetes
among women with and without gestational
diabetes: the Diabetes Prevention Program outcomes
study 10-year follow-up. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2015;100:1646–1653
205. Vounzoulaki E, Khunti K, Abner SC, Tan BK,
Davies MJ, Gillies CL. Progression to type 2 diabetes
in women with a known history of gestational
diabetes: systematic review and meta-analysis.
BMJ 2020;369:m1361
206. Metzger BE, Lowe LP, Dyer AR, et al.; HAPO
Study Cooperative Research Group. Hyperglycemia
and adverse pregnancy outcomes. N Engl J Med
2008;358:1991–2002
207. O’Sullivan JB, Mahan CM. Criteria for the
oral glucose tolerance test in pregnancy. Diabetes
1964;13:278–285
208. Sacks DA, Hadden DR, Maresh M, et al.;
HAPO
Study
Cooperative
Research
Group.
Frequency of gestational diabetes mellitus at
collaborating centers based on IADPSG consensus
panel-recommended criteria: the Hyperglycemia
and Adverse Pregnancy Outcome (HAPO) Study.
Diabetes Care 2012;35:526–528
209. Brown FM, Wyckoff J. Application of one-
step IADPSG versus two-step diagnostic criteria
for gestational diabetes in the real world: impact
on health services, clinical care, and outcomes.
Curr Diab Rep 2017;17:85
210. Lowe WL Jr, Scholtens DM, Lowe LP, et al.;
HAPO Follow-up Study Cooperative Research
Group. Association of gestational diabetes with
maternal disorders of glucose metabolism and
childhood adiposity. JAMA 2018;320:1005–1016
211. Landon MB, Spong CY, Thom E, et al.;
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development Maternal-Fetal
Medicine Units Network. A multicenter, randomized
trial of treatment for mild gestational diabetes. N
Engl J Med 2009;361:1339–1348
212. Crowther CA, Hiller JE, Moss JR, McPhee AJ,
Jeffries WS; Australian Carbohydrate Intolerance
Study in Pregnant Women (ACHOIS) Trial Group.
Effect of treatment of gestational diabetes mellitus
on pregnancy outcomes. N Engl J Med 2005;352:
2477–2486
213. Hillier TA, Pedula KL, Ogasawara KK, et al. A
pragmatic, randomized clinical trial of gestational
diabetes screening. N Engl J Med 2021;384:
895–904
214. Coustan DR, Dyer AR, Metzger BE. One-
step or 2-step testing for gestational diabetes:
which is better? Am J Obstet Gynecol 2021;225:
634–644
215. Cowie CC, Casagrande SS, Menke A, et al.
Diabetes in America. 3rd ed. Bethesda, MD,
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases (US), 2018. Accessed 26 September
2023. Available from https://www.niddk.nih.gov/
about-niddk/strategic-plans-reports/diabetes-in
-america-3rd-edition
216. Lowe WL Jr, Scholtens DM, Kuang A, et al.
HAPO Follow-up Study Cooperative Research
Group. Hyperglycemia and Adverse Pregnancy
Outcome Follow-up Study (HAPO FUS): maternal
gestational
diabetes
mellitus
and
childhood
glucose metabolism. Diabetes Care 2019;42:
372–380
217. Scholtens DM, Kuang A, Lowe LP, et al.;
HAPO Follow-up Study Cooperative Research
Group;
HAPO
Follow-Up
Study
Cooperative
Research Group. Hyperglycemia and Adverse
Pregnancy Outcome Follow-up Study (HAPO
FUS): maternal glycemia and childhood glucose
metabolism. Diabetes Care 2019;42:381–392
218. Josefson JL, Scholtens DM, Kuang A, et al.;
HAPO Follow-up Study Cooperative Research
Group. Newborn adiposity and cord blood
C-peptide as mediators of the maternal meta-
bolic
environment
and childhood
adiposity.
Diabetes Care 2021;44:1194–1202
219. Landon MB, Rice MM, Varner MW, et al.;
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development Maternal-Fetal
Medicine Units (MFMU) Network. Mild gestational
diabetes mellitus and long-term child health.
Diabetes Care 2015;38:445–452
220. Tam WH, Ma RCW, Ozaki R, et al. In utero
exposure to maternal hyperglycemia increases
childhood cardiometabolic risk in offspring. Dia-
betes Care 2017;40:679–686
221. Vandorsten JP, Dodson WC, Espeland MA,
et al. NIH consensus development conference:
diagnosing gestational diabetes mellitus. NIH
Consens State Sci Statements 2013;29:1–31
222. Committee on Practice Bulletins—Obstetrics.
ACOG practice bulletin no. 190: gestational
diabetes mellitus. Obstet Gynecol 2018;131:e49–
e64
223. Pillay J, Donovan L, Guitard S, et al.
Screening for gestational diabetes mellitus: a
systematic review to update the 2014 U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation.
In US Preventative Services Task Force Evidence
Syntheses, formerly Systematic Evidence Reviews.
Rockville, MD, Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality, 2021. Available from https://www
.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK573100/
224. Khalafallah A, Phuah E, Al-Barazan AM,
et al. Glycosylated haemoglobin for screening
and diagnosis of gestational diabetes mellitus.
BMJ Open 2016;6:e011059
225. Horvath K, Koch K, Jeitler K, et al. Effects of
treatment in women with gestational diabetes
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
S41
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

mellitus: systematic review and meta-analysis.
BMJ 2010;340:c1395
226. Carpenter MW, Coustan DR. Criteria for
screening tests for gestational diabetes. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 1982;144:768–773
227. National Diabetes Data Group. Classiﬁcation
and diagnosis of diabetes mellitus and other
categories of glucose intolerance. Diabetes 1979;28:
1039–1057
228. Harper LM, Mele L, Landon MB, et al.;
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development (NICHD) Maternal-
Fetal Medicine Units (MFMU) Network. Carpenter-
Coustan compared with National Diabetes Data
Group criteria for diagnosing gestational diabetes.
Obstet Gynecol 2016;127:893–898
229. Mo X, Gai Tobe R, Takahashi Y, et al.
Economic evaluations of gestational diabetes
mellitus screening: a systematic review. J Epidemiol
2021;31:220–230
230. Wei Y, Yang H, Zhu W, et al. International
Association of Diabetes and Pregnancy Study
Group criteria is suitable for gestational diabetes
mellitus diagnosis: further evidence from China.
Chin Med J (Engl) 2014;127:3553–3556
231. Feldman
RK,
Tieu
RS,
Yasumura
L.
Gestational diabetes screening: the International
Association of the Diabetes and Pregnancy Study
Groups compared with Carpenter-Coustan screening.
Obstet Gynecol 2016;127:10–17
232. Saccone G, Khalifeh A, Al-Kouatly HB,
Sendek K, Berghella V. Screening for gestational
diabetes mellitus: one step versus two step
approach. A meta-analysis of randomized
trials. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2020;33:
1616–1624
233. Ethridge JK Jr, Catalano PM, Waters TP.
Perinatal outcomes associated with the diagnosis
of gestational diabetes made by the international
association of the diabetes and pregnancy study
groups criteria. Obstet Gynecol 2014;124:571–
578
234. Mayo K, Melamed N, Vandenberghe H,
Berger H. The impact of adoption of the
international association of diabetes in pregnancy
study group criteria for the screening and dia-
gnosis of gestational diabetes. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2015;212:224.e1–224.e9
S42
Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

3. Prevention or Delay of
Diabetes and Associated
Comorbidities: Standards of Care
in Diabetes—2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S43–S51 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S003
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” in-
cludes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to
provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guide-
lines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional
Practice Committee, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for
updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a
detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the
evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full
list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction
and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are
invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
For guidelines related to screening for increased risk for type 2 diabetes (prediabe-
tes), please refer to Section 2, “Diagnosis and Classiﬁcation and of Diabetes.” For
guidelines related to screening, diagnosis, and management of type 2 diabetes in
youth, please refer to Section 14, “Children and Adolescents.”
Recommendations
3.1 In people with prediabetes, monitor for the development of type 2 diabetes
at least annually; modify based on individual risk assessment. E
3.2 In people with preclinical type 1 diabetes, monitor for disease progression
using A1C approximately every 6 months and 75-g oral glucose tolerance test
(i.e., fasting and 2-h plasma glucose) annually; modify frequency of monitor-
ing based on individual risk assessment based on age, number and type of
autoantibodies, and glycemic metrics. E
Screening for prediabetes and type 2 diabetes risk through an assessment of risk factors
(Table 2.5) or with an assessment tool, such as the American Diabetes Association risk
test (Fig. 2.2), is recommended to guide whether to perform a diagnostic test for predi-
abetes (Table 2.2) and type 2 diabetes (Table 2.1) (see Section 2, “Diagnosis and
Classiﬁcation of Diabetes”). Testing high-risk adults for prediabetes is warranted be-
cause the laboratory assessment is safe and reasonable in cost, substantial time exists
before the development of type 2 diabetes and its complications during which one can
intervene, and there are effective approaches delaying type 2 diabetes in those with
prediabetes with an A1C 5.7–6.4% (39–47 mmol/mol), impaired glucose tolerance
(IGT), or impaired fasting glucose (IFG).The utility of screening with A1C for prediabetes
*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee. 3. Prevention or
delay of diabetes and associated comorbidities:
Standards of Care in Diabetes—2024. Diabetes
Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S43–S51
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
3. PREVENTION OR DELAY OF DIABETES
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
S43
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

and diabetes may be limited in the pres-
ence of hemoglobinopathies and condi-
tions that affect red blood cell turnover.
See Section 2, “Diagnosis and Classiﬁcation
of Diabetes,” and Section 6, “Glycemic
Goals and Hypoglycemia,” for additional
details on the appropriate use and limita-
tions of A1C testing.
Three distinct stages of type 1 diabetes
have been deﬁned, with symptomatic
type 1 diabetes being stage 3 (Table 2.3).
In individuals at risk for development of
clinical type 1 diabetes, younger age of
seroconversion (particularly under age
3 years), the total number of diabetes re-
lated autoantibodies (1), and the devel-
opment of autoantibodies against islet
antigen 2 (IA-2) have all been associated
with more rapid progression to clinical
type 1 diabetes.While continuous glucose
monitoring can predict progression to
overt diabetes in children with autoanti-
bodies (2), oral glucose tolerance testing–
based metrics are superior in predicting
progression compared with continuous
glucose monitoring (3). The decision to
perform an oral glucose tolerance test
may depend on such factors as eligibility
and interest for stage-speciﬁc treatments,
participation in clinical research, and avail-
ability and burden of testing.
LIFESTYLE BEHAVIOR CHANGE
FOR DIABETES PREVENTION
Recommendations
3.3 Refer adults with overweight or
obesity at high risk of type 2 diabetes,
as seen in the Diabetes Prevention
Program (DPP), to an intensive life-
style behavior change program to
achieve and maintain a weight reduc-
tion of at least 7% of initial body weight
through healthy reduced-calorie diet
and $150 min/week of moderate-
intensity physical activity. A
3.4 A variety of eating patterns can be
considered to prevent type 2 diabetes
in individuals with prediabetes. B
3.5 Given the cost-effectiveness of lifestyle
behaviormodiﬁcationprogramsfordiabe-
tes prevention, such diabetes prevention
programs should be offered to adults at
high risk of type 2 diabetes. A Diabetes
prevention programs should be covered
by third-party payers, and inconsistencies
in access should be addressed. E
3.6 Based on individual preference,
certiﬁed technology-assisted diabetes
prevention programs may be effec-
tive in preventing type 2 diabetes and
should be considered. B
The Diabetes Prevention Program
Several major randomized controlled tri-
als, including the Diabetes Prevention
Program (DPP) trial (4), the Finnish Diabe-
tes Prevention Study (DPS) (5), and the
Da Qing Diabetes Prevention Study (Da
Qing study) (6), demonstrate that life-
style/behavioral intervention with an indi-
vidualized reduced-calorie meal plan is
highly effective in preventing or delaying
type 2 diabetes and improving other car-
diometabolic risk factors (such as blood
pressure, lipids, and inﬂammation) (7).
The strongest evidence for diabetes pre-
vention in the U.S. comes from the DPP
trial (4). The DPP demonstrated that in-
tensive lifestyle intervention could reduce
the risk of incident type 2 diabetes by
58% over 3 years. Follow-up of three large
trials of lifestyle intervention for diabetes
prevention showed sustained reduction in
the risk of progression to type 2 diabetes:
39% reduction at 30 years in the Da Qing
study (8), 43% reduction at 7 years in the
Finnish DPS (5), and 34% reduction at
10 years (9) and 27% reduction at 15 years
(10) in the U.S. Diabetes Prevention Pro-
gram Outcomes Study (DPPOS).
The DPP lifestyle intervention was a
goal-based intervention. All participants
were given the same weight loss and
physical activity goals, but individualiza-
tion was permitted in the speciﬁc meth-
ods used to achieve the goals (11). The
two major goals of the DPP intensive life-
style intervention were to achieve and
maintain a minimum of 7% weight loss
and 150 min of moderate-intensity physi-
cal activity per week, such as brisk walk-
ing. Although weight loss was the most
important factor in reducing the risk of in-
cident diabetes, achieving the behavioral
goal of at least 150 min of physical activ-
ity per week, even without achieving the
weight loss goal, reduced the incidence
of type 2 diabetes by 44% (12).
The 7% weight loss goal was selected
because it was feasible to achieve and
maintain and likely to lessen the risk of de-
veloping diabetes (as well as improve other
cardiometabolic risk factors). Participants
were encouraged to achieve the $7%
weight loss during the ﬁrst 6 months of
the intervention. Further analysis suggests
higher beneﬁt for prevention of diabetes
with at least 7–10% weight loss with life-
style interventions (12).The recommended
pace of weight loss was 1–2 lb/week. Calo-
rie goals were calculated by estimating the
daily calories needed to maintain the par-
ticipant’s initial weight and subtracting
500–1,000 calories/day (depending on ini-
tial body weight).The initial focus of the di-
etary intervention was on reducing total
fat rather than calories. After several
weeks, the concept of calorie balance and
the need to restrict calories and fat was in-
troduced (11).
The goal for physical activity was se-
lected to approximate at least 700 kcal/
week expenditure from physical activity.
For ease of translation, this goal was de-
scribed as at least 150 min of moderate-
intensity physical activity per week, similar
in intensity to brisk walking. Participants
were encouraged to distribute their activ-
ity throughout the week with a minimum
frequency of three times per week and at
least 10 min per session. A maximum of
75 min of strength training could be ap-
plied toward the total 150 min/week
physical activity goal (11).
To implement the weight loss and physi-
cal activity goals, the DPP used an individ-
ual model of treatment rather than a
group-based approach. This choice was
based on a desire to intervene before par-
ticipants had the possibility of developing
diabetes or losing interest in the program.
The individual approach also allowed for
the tailoring of interventions to reﬂect the
diversity of the population (11).
The DPP intervention was adminis-
tered as a structured core curriculum fol-
lowed by a ﬂexible maintenance program
of individual counseling, group sessions,
motivational campaigns, and restart op-
portunities. The 16-session core curricu-
lum was completed within the ﬁrst
24 weeks of the program. It included
sessions on lowering calories, increasing
physical activity, self-monitoring, main-
taining healthy lifestyle behaviors (such
as how to choose healthy food options
when eating out), and guidance on man-
aging psychological, social, and motiva-
tional challenges. Further details are
available regarding the core curriculum
sessions (11).
Nutrition
Nutrition counseling for weight loss in the
DPP lifestyle intervention arm included a
S44
Prevention or Delay of Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

reduction of total dietary fat and calories
(4,11,12). However, evidence suggests that
there is not an ideal percentage of calories
from carbohydrate, protein, and fat for
all people to prevent diabetes; therefore,
macronutrient distribution should be based
on an individualized assessment of current
eating patterns, preferences, and meta-
bolic goals (13). Based on other trials, a va-
riety of eating patterns (13,14) may also be
appropriate for individuals with prediabe-
tes (13), including Mediterranean-style and
low-carbohydrate eating plans (15–18). Ob-
servational studies have also shown that
vegetarian, plant-based (may include some
animal products), and Dietary Approaches
to Stop Hypertension (DASH) eating pat-
terns are associated with a lower risk of
developing type 2 diabetes (19–22). Evi-
dence suggests that the overall quality of
food consumed (as measured by the
Healthy Eating Index, Alternative Healthy
Eating Index, and DASH score), with an
emphasis on whole grains, legumes, nuts,
fruits, and vegetables and minimal re-
ﬁned and processed foods, is also associ-
ated with a lower risk of type 2 diabetes
(21,23–25). As is the case for those with
diabetes, individualized medical nutrition
therapy (see Section 5, “Facilitating
Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
to Improve Health Outcomes,” for more
detailed information) is effective in lower-
ing A1C in individuals diagnosed with pre-
diabetes (26).
Physical Activity
Moderate-intensity physical activity, such
as brisk walking for 150 min/week, has
shown beneﬁcial effects in those with
prediabetes (4). Similarly, moderate-
intensity physical activity has been shown
to improve insulin sensitivity and reduce
abdominal fat in children and young
adults (27,28). Health care professionals
are encouraged to promote a DPP-style
program to all individuals who have been
identiﬁed to be at an increased risk of
type 2 diabetes. In addition to aerobic
activity, a physical activity plan designed
to prevent diabetes may include resis-
tance training (11,29,30). Breaking up
prolonged sedentary time may also be
encouraged, as it is associated with
moderately lower postprandial glucose
levels (31,32). The effects of physical ac-
tivity appear to extend to the prevention
of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM)
(33).
Delivery and Dissemination of
Lifestyle Behavior Change for
Diabetes Prevention
Because the intensive lifestyle interven-
tion in the DPP was effective in prevent-
ing type 2 diabetes among those at high
risk for the disease and lifestyle behavior
change programs for diabetes prevention
were shown to be cost-effective, broader
efforts to disseminate scalable lifestyle
behavior change programs for diabetes
prevention with coverage by third-party
payers ensued (34–38). Group delivery of
DPP content in community or primary
care settings has demonstrated the po-
tential to reduce overall program costs
while still producing weight loss and dia-
betes risk reduction (39–43).
The Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) developed the National
Diabetes Prevention Program (National
DPP), a resource designed to bring such
evidence-based lifestyle change programs
for preventing type 2 diabetes to commu-
nities (cdc.gov/diabetes/prevention/index
.htm). This online resource includes loca-
tions of CDC-recognized diabetes preven-
tion lifestyle change programs (cdc.gov/
diabetes/prevention/ﬁnd-a-program.html).
To be eligible for this program, individuals
must have a BMI in the overweight range
and be at risk for diabetes based on labo-
ratory testing, a previous diagnosis of
GDM, or a positive risk test (cdc.gov/
prediabetes/takethetest/). During the ﬁrst
4 years of implementation of the CDC’s
National DPP, 36% achieved the 5% weight
loss goal (44).The CDC has also developed
the Diabetes Prevention Impact Tool Kit
(nccd.cdc.gov/toolkit/diabetesimpact) to
help organizations assess the economics
of providing or covering the National DPP
(45). To expand preventive services using
a cost-effective model, the Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services expanded
Medicare reimbursement coverage for
the National DPP to organizations recog-
nized by the CDC that become Medicare
suppliers for this service (innovation
.cms.gov/innovation-models/medicare
-diabetes-prevention-program). The loca-
tions of Medicare DPPs are available on-
line at innovation.cms.gov/innovation
-models/medicare-diabetes-prevention
-program/mdpp-map.To qualify for Medi-
care coverage, individuals must have BMI
>25 kg/m2 (or BMI >23 kg/m2 if self-
identiﬁed as Asian) and glycemic testing
consistent with prediabetes in the last
year. Medicaid coverage of the National
DPP is also expanding on a state-by-state
basis.
While CDC-recognized behavioral counsel-
ing programs, including Medicare DPP
services, have met minimum quality
standards and are reimbursed by many
payers, lower retention rates have been
reported for younger adults and racial
and ethnic minority populations (46).
Therefore, other programs and modalities
of behavioral counseling for diabetes pre-
vention may also be appropriate and efﬁ-
cacious based on individual preferences
and availability. The use of community
health workers to support DPP-like inter-
ventions has been shown to be effective
and cost-effective (47,48) (see Section 1,
“Improving Care and Promoting Health in
Populations,” for more information). The
use of community health workers may fa-
cilitate the adoption of behavior changes
for diabetes prevention while bridging
barriers related to social determinants of
health. However, coverage by third-party
payers remains limited. Counseling by a
registered dietitian nutritionist (RDN) has
been shown to help individuals with predi-
abetes improve eating habits, increase
physical activity, and achieve 7–10% weight
loss (13,49–51). Individualized medical nu-
trition therapy (see Section 5, “Facilitating
Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
to Improve Health Outcomes,” for more
detailed information) is also effective in im-
proving glycemia in individuals diagnosed
with prediabetes (26,49). Furthermore, tri-
als involving medical nutrition therapy for
adults with prediabetes found signiﬁcant
reductions in weight, waist circumference,
and glycemia. Individuals with prediabetes
can beneﬁt from referral to an RDN for
individualized medical nutrition therapy
upon diagnosis and at regular intervals
throughout their treatment plan (50,52).
Other health care professionals, such as
pharmacists and diabetes care and educa-
tion specialists, may be considered for dia-
betes prevention efforts (53,54).
Technology-assisted programs may ef-
fectively deliver a DPP-like intervention
(55–60). A digital diabetes prevention
program improved cardiovascular risk at
4 months but not at 12 months (61).
Such technology-assisted programs may
deliver content through smartphones,
web-based applications, and telehealth
and may be an acceptable and efﬁca-
cious option to bridge barriers, particu-
larly for individuals with low income and
people in rural locations; however, not
diabetesjournals.org/care
Prevention or Delay of Diabetes
S45
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

all technology-assisted programs are ef-
fective (55,62–64). The CDC Diabetes
Prevention Recognition Program (DPRP)
(cdc.gov/diabetes/prevention/requirements
-recognition.htm)
certiﬁes
technology-
assisted modalities as effective vehicles
for DPP-based interventions; such pro-
grams must use an approved curriculum,
include interaction with a coach, and at-
tain the DPP outcomes of participation,
physical activity reporting, and weight
loss. Health care professionals should con-
sider referring adults with prediabetes to
certiﬁed technology-assisted programs.
Lifestyle and Type 1 Diabetes
Progression
Observational studies suggest that in
those with islet autoantibodies, factors
that may increase b-cell demand includ-
ing less physical activity (65), higher die-
tary glycemic index (66), and total sugar
intake (67) are associated with progression
to clinical diabetes. Similar associations
have not been seen in the development of
autoantibodies. In The Environmental
Determinants of Diabetes in the Young
(TEDDY) longitudinal study, daily minutes
spent in moderate to vigorous physical
activity were associated with a reduced
risk of progression to type 1 diabetes in
children 5 to 15 years of age with multiple
islet autoantibodies (hazard ratio [HR]
0.92 [95% CI 0.86–0.99] per 10-min in-
crease; P = 0.021) (65). In the Diabetes
Autoimmunity Study in the Young (DAISY),
in children with islet autoantibodies, pro-
gression to type 1 diabetes was associated
with higher dietary glycemic index (HR
2.20 [95% CI 1.17–4.15]) and total sugar
intake (HR 1.75 [95% CI 1.07–2.85])
(66,67). In nonobese diabetic mice, an ani-
mal model for the development of type 1
diabetes, sustained high glucose drinking
signiﬁcantly aggravated islet inﬂammation
and accelerated the onset of type 1 diabe-
tes (68). Lifestyle interventions focusing on
such factors in those with stage 1 or
stage 2 type 1 diabetes have not yet
been reported.
PHARMACOLOGIC
INTERVENTIONS
Recommendations
3.7 Metformin for the prevention of
type 2 diabetes should be considered
in adults at high risk of type 2 diabetes,
as typiﬁed by the DPP, especially those
aged 25–59 years with BMI $35 kg/m2,
higher fasting plasma glucose (e.g.,
$110 mg/dL [$6 mmol/L]), and higher
A1C (e.g., $6.0% [$42 mmol/mol]),
and in individuals with prior gestational
diabetes mellitus. A
3.8 Long-term use of metformin
may be associated with vitamin B12
deﬁciency; consider periodic assess-
ment of vitamin B12 level in metfor-
min-treated individuals, especially
in those with anemia or peripheral
neuropathy. B
Because weight loss through behavior
changes in diet and physical activity can
be difﬁcult to maintain long term (9),
people at high risk of type 2 diabetes may
beneﬁt from additional support and phar-
macotherapeutic options, if needed. Vari-
ous pharmacologic agents used to treat
diabetes have been evaluated for diabetes
prevention. Metformin, a-glucosidase in-
hibitors, incretin receptor agonists (e.g.,
liraglutide and semaglutide), thiazolidine-
diones, and insulin have been shown
to lower the incidence of diabetes in
speciﬁc populations (69–74), whereas
diabetes prevention was not seen with
nateglinide (75).
In the DPP, weight loss was an impor-
tant factor in reducing the risk of progres-
sion, with every kilogram of weight loss
conferring a 16% reduction in risk of pro-
gression over 3.2 years (12). In individuals
with previous history of GDM, the risk of
type 2 diabetes increased by 18% for ev-
ery 1 unit BMI above the preconception
baseline (76). Several medications evalu-
ated for weight loss (e.g., orlistat, phenter-
mine/topiramate, liraglutide, semaglutide,
and tirzepatide) have been shown to de-
crease the incidence of type 2 diabetes in
those with prediabetes (74,77–79).
Studies of other pharmacologic agents
have shown some efﬁcacy in diabetes
prevention with valsartan or testosterone
(80,81), but no efﬁcacy in preventing dia-
betes with ramipril or anti-inﬂammatory
drugs (81–84). Although the Vitamin D
and Type 2 Diabetes (D2d) prospective
randomized controlled trial showed no
signiﬁcant beneﬁt of vitamin D versus pla-
cebo on the progression to type 2 diabe-
tes in individuals at high risk (85), post
hoc analyses and meta-analyses suggest a
potential beneﬁt in speciﬁc populations
(85–89). Further research is needed to
deﬁne characteristics and clinical indicators
where vitamin D supplementation may be
of beneﬁt (80).
No pharmacologic agent has been ap-
proved by the U.S. Food and Drug Admin-
istration for prevention of type 2 diabetes.
The risk versus beneﬁt of each medication
in support of person-centered goals must
be weighed in addition to cost and burden
of administration.
Metformin has the most safety data as
a pharmacologic therapy for diabetes pre-
vention (90). Metformin was overall less
effective than lifestyle modiﬁcation in the
DPP, though group differences attenuated
over time in the DPPOS (10), and metfor-
min may be cost-saving over a 10-year
period (36). In the DPP, metformin was as
effective as lifestyle modiﬁcation in par-
ticipants with BMI $35 kg/m2 and in
younger participants aged 25–44 years
(4). In individuals with a history of GDM
in the DPP, metformin and intensive life-
style modiﬁcation led to an equivalent
50% reduction in diabetes risk (91). Both
interventions remained highly effective
during a 10-year follow-up period (92). By
the time of the 15-year follow-up (DPPOS),
exploratory analyses demonstrated that
participants with a higher baseline fasting
glucose ($110 mg/dL [$6 mmol/L] vs.
95–109 mg/dL [5.3–5.9 mmol/L]), those with
a higher A1C (6.0–6.4% [42–46 mmol/mol]
vs. <6.0% [<42 mmol/mol]), and individ-
uals with a history of GDM (vs. individuals
without a history of GDM) experienced
higher risk reductions with metformin,
identifying subgroups of participants that
may beneﬁt the most from metformin
(93). In the Indian Diabetes Prevention
Program (IDPP-1), metformin and lifestyle
intervention reduced diabetes risk simi-
larly at 30 months; however, the lifestyle
intervention in IDPP-1 was less intensive
than that in the DPP (94). Based on ﬁnd-
ings from the DPP, metformin should be
recommended as an option for high-risk
individuals (e.g., younger individuals, those
with history of GDM, or those with BMI
$35 kg/m2). A recent Chinese open-label
randomized controlled trial showed that
metformin combined with standard life-
style intervention further reduced the risk
of developing diabetes than lifestyle inter-
vention alone by 17% over 2 years (95).
Periodic assessment of vitamin B12 level
in those taking metformin chronically
should be considered to check for possible
deﬁciency, especially in those with anemia
or peripheral neuropathy (96,97) (see
Section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches to
S46
Prevention or Delay of Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Glycemic Treatment,” for more details).
The effect of metformin on vitamin B12 in-
creases with time (98), with a higher risk
for vitamin B12 deﬁciency (<150 pmol/L)
noted at 4–5 years. A person who has
been on metformin for more than 4 years
or is at risk for vitamin B12 deﬁciency for
other reasons (e.g., vegan, previous
gastric/small bowel surgery) should be
monitored for vitamin B12 deﬁciency an-
nually (99).
PREVENTION OF VASCULAR
DISEASE AND MORTALITY
Recommendations
3.9 Prediabetes is associated with
heightened cardiovascular risk; there-
fore, screening for and treatment of
modiﬁable risk factors for cardiovascu-
lar disease are suggested. B
3.10 Statin therapy may increase the
risk of type 2 diabetes in people at
high risk of developing type 2 diabe-
tes. In such individuals, glucose status
should be monitored regularly and di-
abetes prevention approaches rein-
forced. It is not recommended that
statins be discontinued for this ad-
verse effect. B
3.11 In people with a history of stroke
and evidence of insulin resistance and
prediabetes, pioglitazone may be con-
sidered to lower the risk of stroke or
myocardial infarction. However, this
beneﬁt needs to be balanced with the
increased risk of weight gain, edema,
and fractures. A Lower doses may mit-
igate the risk of adverse effects but
may be less effective. C
People with prediabetes often have other
cardiovascular risk factors, including hy-
pertension and dyslipidemia (100), and
are at increased risk for cardiovascular
disease (101,102). Evaluation for tobacco
use and referral for tobacco cessation
should be part of routine care for those
at risk for diabetes. Of note, the years
immediately following smoking cessation
may represent a time of increased risk
for diabetes (103–105), and individuals
should be monitored for diabetes devel-
opment
and
receive
evidence-based
lifestyle behavior change for diabetes
prevention described in this section. See
Section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health
Behaviors and Well-being to Improve
Health Outcomes,” for more detailed
information. The lifestyle interventions
for weight loss in study populations at
risk for type 2 diabetes have shown a re-
duction in cardiovascular risk factors and
the need for medications used to treat
these cardiovascular risk factors (106,107).
The lifestyle intervention in the Da Qing
study was associated with lowering car-
diovascular disease and mortality at 23 and
30 years of observational follow-up (6,8).
Treatment goals and therapies for hyper-
tension and dyslipidemia in the primary
and secondary prevention of cardiovas-
cular disease for people with prediabetes
should be based on their level of cardio-
vascular risk. Increased vigilance is war-
ranted to identify and treat these and
other cardiovascular diseases risk factors
(108). Statin use increases risk of diabetes
(109–113). In the DPP, statin use was as-
sociated with greater diabetes risk irre-
spective of the treatment group (pooled
HR [95% CI] for incident diabetes 1.36
[1.17–1.58]) (111). In trials of primary
and secondary prevention of cardiovas-
cular disease, cardiovascular and mortal-
ity beneﬁts of statin therapy exceed the
risk of diabetes (114,115), suggesting a
favorable beneﬁt-to-harm balance with
statin therapy. Hence, discontinuation of
statins is not recommended in this popu-
lation due to concerns of diabetes risk.
Cardiovascular outcome trials in people
without diabetes also inform risk reduc-
tion potential in people without diabetes
at increased cardiometabolic risk (see Sec-
tion 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and Risk
Management,” for more details). The IRIS
(Insulin Resistance Intervention after Stroke)
trial of people with a recent (<6 months)
stroke or transient ischemic attack, without
diabetes but with insulin resistance (as de-
ﬁned by a HOMA of insulin resistance index
of $3.0), evaluated pioglitazone (target
dose of 45 mg daily) compared with pla-
cebo. At 4.8 years, the risk of stroke or
myocardial infarction, as well as the risk
of diabetes, was lower in the pioglitazone
group than with placebo; weight gain,
edema, and fractures were higher in the
pioglitazone treatment group (116–119).
Lower doses may mitigate the adverse ef-
fects but may also be less effective (120).
PERSON-CENTERED CARE GOALS
Recommendations
3.12 In adults with overweight or obe-
sity at high risk of type 2 diabetes,
care goals should include weight loss
and maintenance, minimizing the pro-
gression of hyperglycemia, and atten-
tion to cardiovascular risk. B
3.13 Pharmacotherapy (e.g., for weight
management, minimizing the progres-
sion of hyperglycemia, and cardiovascu-
lar risk reduction) may be considered to
support person-centered care goals. B
3.14 More intensive preventive ap-
proaches should be considered in indi-
viduals who are at particularly high
risk of progression to diabetes, includ-
ing individuals with BMI $35 kg/m2,
those at higher glucose levels (e.g.,
fasting plasma glucose 110–125 mg/dL
[6.1–6.9 mmol/L], 2–h postchallenge glu-
cose 173–199 mg/dL [9.6–11.0 mmol/L],
and A1C $6.0% [$42 mmol/mol]),
and individuals with a history of ges-
tational diabetes mellitus. A
Individualized risk-to-beneﬁt ratio should
be considered in screening, intervention,
and monitoring to lower the risk of type 2
diabetes and associated comorbidities.
Multiple factors, including age, BMI, and
other comorbidities, may inﬂuence the
risk of progression to diabetes and lifetime
risk of complications (121,122). Prediabe-
tes is associated with increased cardiovas-
cular disease and mortality (102), which
emphasizes the importance of attending
to cardiovascular risk in this population.
In the DPP, which enrolled high-risk indi-
viduals with IGT, elevated fasting glucose,
and elevated BMI, the crude incidence of
diabetes within the placebo group was
11 cases per 100 person-years, with a cu-
mulative 3-year incidence of diabetes of
29% (4). Characteristics of individuals in
the DPP/DPPOS who were at particularly
high risk of progression to diabetes (crude
incidence of diabetes 14–22 cases per 100
person-years) included BMI $35 kg/m2,
higher glucose levels (e.g., fasting plasma
glucose 110–125 mg/dL [6–6.9 mmol/L],
2–h postchallenge glucose 173–199 mg/dL
[9.6–11.0
mmol/L],
and
A1C
$6.0%
[$42 mmol/mol]), and a history of GDM
(4,91,92). In contrast, in the community-
based Atherosclerosis Risk in Communi-
ties (ARIC) study, observational follow-up
of adults with mean age 75 years with
laboratory
evidence
of
prediabetes
(based on A1C 5.7–6.4% [39–47 mmol/mol]
and/or fasting glucose 100–125 mg/dL
[5.6–6.9 mmol/L]), but not meeting speciﬁc
BMI criteria, found lower progression to
diabetesjournals.org/care
Prevention or Delay of Diabetes
S47
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

diabetes over 6 years: 9% of those with
A1C-deﬁned prediabetes, 8% with IFG (122).
Thus, it is important to individualize the
risk-to-beneﬁt ratio of intervention and
consider person-centered goals. Risk mod-
els have generally found higher beneﬁt of
the intervention in those at highest risk
(12). Diabetes prevention trials and obser-
vational studies highlight key principles
that may guide person-centered goals. In
the DPP, which enrolled a high-risk popu-
lation meeting criteria for overweight or
obesity, weight loss was an important me-
diator of diabetes prevention or delay,
with greater metabolic beneﬁt seen with
greater weight loss (12,123). In the DPP/
DPPOS, progression to diabetes, duration
of diabetes, and mean level of glycemia
were important determinants of the de-
velopment of microvascular complications
(10). Achieving normal glucose regulation,
even once, during the DPP was associated
with a lower risk of diabetes and lower
risk of microvascular complications (124).
Observational follow-up of the Da Qing
study also showed that regression from
IGT to normal glucose tolerance or re-
maining with IGT rather than progressing
to type 2 diabetes at the end of the
6-year intervention trial resulted in signiﬁ-
cantly lower risk of cardiovascular disease
and microvascular disease over 30 years
(125).
Pharmacotherapy for weight manage-
ment (see Section 8, “Obesity and Weight
Management for the Prevention and
Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes,” for more
details), minimizing the progression of hy-
perglycemia (see Section 9, “Pharmacologic
Approaches to Glycemic Treatment,” for
more details), and cardiovascular risk re-
duction (see Section 10, “Cardiovascular
Disease and Risk Management,” for more
details) can be considered to support indi-
vidualized person-centered goals, with more
intensive preventive approaches considered
in individuals at high riskof progression.
PHARMACOLOGIC
INTERVENTIONS TO DELAY
SYMPTOMATIC TYPE 1 DIABETES
Recommendation
3.15 Teplizumab-mzwv infusion to de-
lay the onset of symptomatic type 1
diabetes (stage 3) should be considered in
selected individuals aged $8 years with
stage 2 type 1 diabetes. Management
should be in a specialized setting with
appropriately trained personnel. B
Teplizumab has been approved to delay
the onset of stage 3 type 1 diabetes in
people 8 years of age and older with
stage 2 type 1 diabetes based in part on
the results of a single trial in relatives of
people with type 1 diabetes (126). In
this study, 44 individuals were random-
ized to a 14-day course of teplizumab
and 32 to placebo. The median time to
stage 3 type 1 diabetes diagnosis was
48.4 months in the teplizumab group and
24.4 months in the placebo group. Type 1
diabetes was diagnosed in 19 (43%) of
participants who received teplizumab and
23 (72%) of those who received placebo
(HR 0.41 [95% CI 0.22–0.78]). In prespeci-
ﬁed analyses, the presence of HLA-DR4,
absence of HLA-DR3, and absence of anti–
zinc transporter 8 antibody predicted re-
sponse to teplizumab (HR 0.20 [95% CI
0.09–0.45], 0.18 [0.07–0.45], and [0.07
[0.02 to 0.26], respectively). The most
common adverse reactions were transient
lymphopenia (73%) followed by rash
(36%).
Numerous clinical studies are being
conducted to test methods for preventing
or delaying the onset of stage 3 type 1 di-
abetes in those with evidence of autoim-
munity without symptoms or for delaying
loss of insulin secretory capacity after on-
set of stage 3, some with promising re-
sults (see ClinicalTrials.gov and TrialNet
.org).
References
1. Ziegler AG, Rewers M, Simell O, et al.
Seroconversion to multiple islet autoantibodies
and risk of progression to diabetes in children.
JAMA 2013;309:2473–2479
2. Steck A, Dong F, Taki I, et al. Continuous
glucose monitoring predicts progression to diabetes
in autoantibody-positive children. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2019;104:3337–3344
3. Ylescupidez A, Speake C, Pietropaolo SL, et al.
OGTT metrics surpass continuous glucose
monitoring data for T1D prediction in multiple-
autoantibody-positive
individuals
[published
correction appears in J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2023;dgad574]. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2023;
dgad472
4. Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE,
et al.; Diabetes Prevention Program Research
Group. Reduction in the incidence of type 2
diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin.
N Engl J Med 2002;346:393–403
5. Lindstr€om J, Ilanne-Parikka P, Peltonen M,
et al.; Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study Group.
Sustained reduction in the incidence of type 2
diabetes by lifestyle intervention: follow-up of
the Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study. Lancet
2006;368:1673–1679
6. Li G, Zhang P, Wang J, et al. Cardiovascular
mortality,
all-cause
mortality,
and
diabetes
incidence after lifestyle intervention for people
with impaired glucose tolerance in the Da Qing
Diabetes Prevention Study: a 23-year follow-up
study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2014;2:474–
480
7. Nathan DM, Bennett PH, Crandall JP, et al.;
DPP Research Group. Does diabetes prevention
translate into reduced long-term vascular
complications of diabetes? Diabetologia 2019;62:
1319–1328
8. Gong Q, Zhang P, Wang J, et al.; Da Qing
Diabetes Prevention Study Group. Morbidity and
mortality after lifestyle intervention for people
with impaired glucose tolerance: 30-year results
of the Da Qing Diabetes Prevention Outcome
Study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2019;7:452–
461
9. Knowler WC, Fowler SE, Hamman RF, et al.;
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.
10-year follow-up of diabetes incidence and
weight loss in the Diabetes Prevention Program
Outcomes Study. Lancet 2009;374:1677–1686
10. Diabetes
Prevention
Program
Research
Group. Long-term effects of lifestyle intervention
or metformin on diabetes development and
microvascular complications over 15-year follow-
up: the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes
Study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2015;3:866–
875
11. Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) Research
Group. The Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP):
description of lifestyle intervention. Diabetes Care
2002;25:2165–2171
12. Hamman RF, Wing RR, Edelstein SL, et al.
Effect of weight loss with lifestyle intervention on
risk of diabetes. Diabetes Care 2006;29:2102–
2107
13. Evert AB, Dennison M, Gardner CD, et al.
Nutrition therapy for adults with diabetes or
prediabetes: a consensus report. Diabetes Care
2019;42:731–754
14. U.S.Department
of
Health
and
Human
Servicesand U.S. Department of Agriculture.
2015–2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. 8th
Ed. Accessed 7 October 2023. Available from
https://health.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/2019-09/
2015-2020_Dietary_Guidelines.pdf
15. Salas-Salvado J, Guasch-Ferre M, Lee CH,
Estruch R, Clish CB, Ros E. Protective effects of
the Mediterranean diet on type 2 diabetes and
metabolic syndrome. J Nutr 2015;146:920S–927S
16. Bloomﬁeld HE, Koeller E, Greer N, MacDonald
R, Kane R, Wilt TJ. Effects on health outcomes of a
Mediterranean diet with no restriction on fat
intake: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann
Intern Med 2016;165:491–500
17. Estruch R, Ros E, Salas-Salvado J, et al.;
PREDIMED Study Investigators. Primary prevention
of cardiovascular disease with a Mediterranean
diet supplemented with extra-virgin olive oil or
nuts. N Engl J Med 2018;378:e34
18. Stentz FB, Brewer A, Wan J, et al. Remission
of pre-diabetes to normal glucose tolerance
in obese adults with high protein versus high
carbohydrate diet: randomized control trial. BMJ
Open Diabetes Res Care 2016;4:e000258
19. Chiu THT, Pan WH, Lin MN, Lin CL.Vegetarian
diet, change in dietary patterns, and diabetes risk:
a prospective study. Nutr Diabetes 2018;8:12
20. Lee Y, Park K. Adherence to a vegetarian diet
and diabetes risk: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of observational studies. Nutrients 2017;
9:603
S48
Prevention or Delay of Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

21. Qian F, Liu G, Hu FB, Bhupathiraju SN, Sun Q.
Association between plant-based dietary patterns
and risk of type 2 diabetes: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med 2019;179:
1335–1344
22. Esposito
K,
Chiodini
P,
Maiorino
MI,
Bellastella G, Panagiotakos D, Giugliano D. Which
diet for prevention of type 2 diabetes? A meta-
analysis of prospective studies. Endocrine 2014;
47:107–116
23. Ley SH, Hamdy O, Mohan V, Hu FB.
Prevention and management of type 2 diabetes:
dietary components and nutritional strategies.
Lancet 2014;383:1999–2007
24. Jacobs S, Harmon BE, Boushey CJ, et al. A
priori-deﬁned diet quality indexes and risk of type 2
diabetes: the Multiethnic Cohort. Diabetologia
2015;58:98–112
25. Chiuve SE, Fung TT, Rimm EB, et al.
Alternative dietary indices both strongly predict
risk of chronic disease. J Nutr 2012;142:1009–
1018
26. Parker AR, Byham-Gray L, Denmark R,
Winkle PJ.The effect of medical nutrition therapy
by a registered dietitian nutritionist in patients
with prediabetes participating in a randomized
controlled clinical research trial. J Acad Nutr Diet
2014;114:1739–1748
27. Fedewa MV, Gist NH, Evans EM, Dishman
RK. Exercise and insulin resistance in youth: a
meta-analysis. Pediatrics 2014;133:e163–e174
28. Davis CL, Pollock NK,Waller JL, et al. Exercise
dose and diabetes risk in overweight and obese
children: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA
2012;308:1103–1112
29. Sigal RJ, Alberga AS, Goldﬁeld GS, et al.
Effects of aerobic training, resistance training, or
both on percentage body fat and cardiometabolic
risk markers in obese adolescents: the healthy
eating aerobic and resistance training in youth
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Pediatr 2014;
168:1006–1014
30. Dai X, Zhai L, Chen Q, et al. Two-year-
supervised
resistance
training
prevented
diabetes incidence in people with prediabetes: a
randomised control trial. Diabetes Metab Res
Rev 2019;35:e3143
31. Thorp AA, Kingwell BA, Sethi P, Hammond L,
Owen N, Dunstan DW. Alternating bouts of sitting
and standing attenuate postprandial glucose
responses. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2014;46:2053–
2061
32. Healy GN, Dunstan DW, Salmon J, et al.
Breaks in sedentary time: beneﬁcial associations
with metabolic risk. Diabetes Care 2008;31:661–
666
33. Russo LM, Nobles C, Ertel KA, Chasan-Taber
L,Whitcomb BW. Physical activity interventions in
pregnancy and risk of gestational diabetes
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Obstet Gynecol 2015;125:576–582
34. Herman WH, Hoerger TJ, Brandle M, et al.;
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.
The cost-effectiveness of lifestyle modiﬁcation or
metformin in preventing type 2 diabetes in adults
with impaired glucose tolerance. Ann Intern Med
2005;142:323–332
35. Chen F, Su W, Becker SH, et al. Clinical and
economic impact of a digital, remotely-delivered
intensive behavioral counseling program on
medicare beneﬁciaries at risk for diabetes and
cardiovascular disease. PLoS One 2016;11:
e0163627
36. Diabetes
Prevention
Program
Research
Group. The 10-year cost-effectiveness of lifestyle
intervention or metformin for diabetes prevention:
an intent-to-treat analysis of the DPP/DPPOS.
Diabetes Care 2012;35:723–730
37. Alva ML, Hoerger TJ, Jeyaraman R, Amico P,
Rojas-Smith L. Impact of the YMCA of the USA
Diabetes
Prevention
Program
on
Medicare
spending and utilization. Health Aff (Millwood)
2017;36:417–424
38. Zhou X, Siegel KR, Ng BP, et al. Cost-
effectiveness of diabetes prevention interventions
targeting
high-risk
individuals
and
whole
populations: a systematic review. Diabetes Care
2020;43:1593–1616
39. Ackermann RT, Finch EA, Brizendine E, Zhou
H,
Marrero
DG.
Translating
the
Diabetes
Prevention Program into the community. The
DEPLOY pilot study. Am J Prev Med 2008;35:
357–363
40. Balk EM, Earley A, Raman G, Avendano EA,
Pittas AG, Remington PL. Combined diet and
physical activity promotion programs to prevent
type 2 diabetes among persons at increased risk:
a systematic review for the Community Preventive
Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med 2015;163:
437–451
41. Li R, Qu S, Zhang P, et al. Economic
evaluation of combined diet and physical activity
promotion programs to prevent type 2 diabetes
among persons at increased risk: a systematic
review for the Community Preventive Services
Task Force. Ann Intern Med 2015;163:452–460
42. Gilmer T, O’Connor PJ, Schiff JS, et al. Cost-
effectiveness of a community-based diabetes
prevention program with participation incentives
for medicaid beneﬁciaries. Health Serv Res 2018;
53:4704–4724
43. Ackermann RT, Kang R, Cooper AJ, et al.
Effect
on
health
care
expenditures
during
nationwide implementation of the Diabetes
Prevention Program as a health insurance beneﬁt.
Diabetes Care 2019;42:1776–1783
44. Ely EK, Gruss SM, Luman ET, et al. A national
effort to prevent type 2 diabetes: participant-
level evaluation of CDC’s National Diabetes
Prevention Program. Diabetes Care 2017;40:
1331–1341
45. Lanza A, Soler R, Smith B, Hoerger T,
Neuwahl S, Zhang P. The Diabetes Prevention
Impact Tool Kit: an online tool kit to assess the
cost-effectiveness of preventing type 2 diabetes.
J Public Health Manag Pract 2019;25:E1–E5
46. Cannon MJ, Masalovich S, Ng BP, et al.
Retention among participants in the National
Diabetes Prevention Program lifestyle change
program, 2012-2017. Diabetes Care 2020;43:2042–
2049
47. The Community Guide. Diabetes prevention:
interventions engaging community health workers,
2016. Accessed 7 October 2023. Available from
https://www.thecommunityguide.org/ﬁndings/
diabetes-prevention-interventions-engaging
-community-health-workers
48. Jacob V, Chattopadhyay SK, Hopkins DP,
et al. Economics of community health workers for
chronic disease: ﬁndings from Community Guide
systematic reviews. Am J Prev Med 2019;56:
e95–e106
49. Raynor HA, Davidson PG, Burns H, et al.
Medical nutrition therapy and weight loss
questions for the Evidence Analysis Library
prevention of type 2 diabetes project: systematic
reviews. J Acad Nutr Diet 2017;117:1578–1611
50. Sun Y, You W, Almeida F, Estabrooks P, Davy
B. The
effectiveness
and
cost
of
lifestyle
interventions including nutrition education for
diabetes prevention: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. J Acad Nutr Diet 2017;117:404–
421.e36
51. Briggs Early K, Stanley K. Position of the
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics: the role of
medical nutrition therapy and registered dietitian
nutritionists in the prevention and treatment of
prediabetes and type 2 diabetes. J Acad Nutr Diet
2018;118:343–353
52. Powers MA, Bardsley JK, Cypress M, et al.
Diabetes self-management education and support in
adults with type 2 diabetes: a consensus report of
the American Diabetes Association, the Association
of Diabetes Care & Education Specialists, the
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, the American
Academy of Family Physicians, the American
Academy of PAs, the American Association of
Nurse Practitioners, and the American Pharmacists
Association. Diabetes Care 2020;43:1636–1649
53. Hudspeth BD. Power of prevention: the
pharmacist’s role in prediabetes management.
Diabetes Spectr 2018;31:320–323
54. Butcher MK, Vanderwood KK, Hall TO,
Gohdes D, Helgerson SD, Harwell TS. Capacity of
diabetes education programs to provide both
diabetes self-management education and to
implement diabetes prevention services. J Public
Health Manag Pract 2011;17:242–247
55. Grock S, Ku JH, Kim J, Moin T. A review of
technology-assisted interventions for diabetes
prevention. Curr Diab Rep 2017;17:107
56. Sepah SC, Jiang L, Peters AL. Translating the
Diabetes Prevention Program into an online
social network: validation against CDC standards.
Diabetes Educ 2014;40:435–443
57. Bian RR, Piatt GA, Sen A, et al. The effect
of
technology-mediated
diabetes
prevention
interventions on weight: a meta-analysis. J Med
Internet Res 2017;19:e76
58. Sepah SC, Jiang L, Peters AL. Long-term
outcomes of a Web-based diabetes prevention
program: 2-year results of a single-arm longitudinal
study. J Med Internet Res 2015;17:e92
59. Moin T, Damschroder LJ, AuYoung M, et al.
Results from a trial of an online Diabetes
Prevention Program intervention. Am J Prev Med
2018;55:583–591
60. Michaelides A, Major J, Pienkosz E Jr,Wood M,
Kim Y, Toro-Ramos T. Usefulness of a novel mobile
Diabetes Prevention Program delivery platform
with human coaching: 65-week observational
follow-up. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2018;6:e93
61. Michaud TL, Almeida FA, Porter GC, et al.
Effects of a digital diabetes prevention program
on cardiovascular risk among individuals with
prediabetes. Prim Care Diabetes 2023;17:148–
154
62. Kim SE, Castro Sweet CM, Cho E, Tsai J,
Cousineau MR. Evaluation of a digital diabetes
prevention program adapted for low-income
patients, 2016-2018. Prev Chronic Dis 2019;16:
E155
63. Vadheim LM, Patch K, Brokaw SM, et al.
Telehealth delivery of the Diabetes Prevention
diabetesjournals.org/care
Prevention or Delay of Diabetes
S49
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Program to rural communities. Transl Behav Med
2017;7:286–291
64. Fischer HH, Durfee MJ, Raghunath SG, Ritchie
ND. Short message service text message support
for weight loss in patients with prediabetes:
pragmatic trial. JMIR Diabetes 2019;4:e12985
65. Liu X, Johnson SB, Lynch KF, et al.; TEDDY
Study Group. Physical activity and the development
of islet autoimmunity and type 1 diabetes in 5- to
15-year-old children followed in the TEDDY study.
Diabetes Care 2023;46:1409–1416
66. Lamb MM, Yin X, Barriga K, et al. Dietary
glycemic index, development of islet autoimmunity,
and subsequent progression to type 1 diabetes in
young children. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008;
93:3936–3942
67. Lamb MM, Frederiksen B, Seifert JA, Kroehl
M, Rewers M, Norris JM. Sugar intake is associated
with progression from islet autoimmunity to type 1
diabetes: the Diabetes Autoimmunity Study in the
Young. Diabetologia 2015;58:2027–2034
68. Li X, Wang L, Meng G, et al. Sustained high
glucose intake accelerates type 1 diabetes in
NOD mice. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2022;13:
1037822
69. Gerstein HC, Bosch J, Dagenais GR, et al.;
ORIGIN Trial Investigators. Basal insulin and
cardiovascular and other outcomes in dysglycemia.
N Engl J Med 2012;367:319–328
70. DeFronzo RA, Tripathy D, Schwenke DC,
et al.; ACT NOW Study. Pioglitazone for diabetes
prevention in impaired glucose tolerance. N Engl
J Med 2011;364:1104–1115
71. Gerstein HC, Yusuf S, Bosch J, et al.; DREAM
(Diabetes REduction Assessment with ramipril and
rosiglitazone Medication) Trial Investigators. Effect
of rosiglitazone on the frequency of diabetes in
patients with impaired glucose tolerance or
impaired fasting glucose: a randomised controlled
trial. Lancet 2006;368:1096–1105
72. le Roux CW, Astrup A, Fujioka K, et al.; SCALE
Obesity Prediabetes NN8022-1839 Study Group.
3 years of liraglutide versus placebo for type 2
diabetes risk reduction and weight management
in individuals with prediabetes: a randomised,
double-blind trial. Lancet 2017;389:1399–1409
73. Chiasson JL, Josse RG, Gomis R, Hanefeld M,
Karasik A; STOP-NIDDM Trail Research Group.
Acarbose for prevention of type 2 diabetes
mellitus: the STOP-NIDDM randomised trial.
Lancet 2002;359:2072–2077
74. Wilding JPH, Batterham RL, Calanna S, et al.;
STEP 1 Study Group. Once-weekly semaglutide in
adults with overweight or obesity. N Engl J Med
2021;384:989–1002
75. Holman RR, Haffner SM, McMurray JJ, et al.;
NAVIGATOR Study Group. Effect of nateglinide
on the incidence of diabetes and cardiovascular
events. N Engl J Med 2010;362:1463–1476
76. Dennison RA, Chen ES, Green ME, et al. The
absolute and relative risk of type 2 diabetes after
gestational diabetes: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of 129 studies. Diabetes Res Clin
Pract 2021;171:108625
77. Torgerson JS, Hauptman J, Boldrin MN,
Sj€ostr€om L. XENical in the prevention of diabetes
in obese subjects (XENDOS) study: a randomized
study of orlistat as an adjunct to lifestyle changes
for the prevention of type 2 diabetes in obese
patients. Diabetes Care 2004;27:155–161
78. Garvey WT, Ryan DH, Henry R, et al.
Prevention of type 2 diabetes in subjects with
prediabetes and metabolic syndrome treated
with phentermine and topiramate extended
release. Diabetes Care 2014;37:912–921
79. Jastreboff AM, Aronne LJ, Ahmad NN, et al.;
SURMOUNT-1 Investigators. Tirzepatide once
weekly for the treatment of obesity. N Engl J Med
2022;387:205–216
80. Wittert G, Bracken K, Robledo KP, et al.
Testosterone treatment to prevent or revert type 2
diabetes in men enrolled in a lifestyle programme
(T4DM): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, 2-year, phase 3b trial. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol 2021;9:32–45
81. McMurray JJ, Holman RR, Haffner SM, et al.;
NAVIGATOR Study Group. Effect of valsartan on
the incidence of diabetes and cardiovascular
events. N Engl J Med 2010;362:1477–1490
82. Bosch J, Yusuf S, Gerstein HC, et al.; DREAM
Trial Investigators. Effect of ramipril on the
incidence of diabetes. N Engl J Med 2006;355:
1551–1562
83. Ray KK, Colhoun HM, Szarek M, et al.; ODYSSEY
OUTCOMES Committees and Investigators. Effects
of alirocumab on cardiovascular and metabolic
outcomes after acute coronary syndrome in patients
with or without diabetes: a prespeciﬁed analysis of
the ODYSSEY OUTCOMES randomised controlled
trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2019;7:618–628
84. Everett BM, Donath MY, Pradhan AD, et al.
Anti-inﬂammatory therapy with canakinumab for
the prevention and management of diabetes. J
Am Coll Cardiol 2018;71:2392–2401
85. Pittas AG, Dawson-Hughes B, Sheehan P, et al.;
D2d Research Group. Vitamin D supplementation
and prevention of type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med
2019;381:520–530
86. Dawson-Hughes B, Staten MA, Knowler WC,
et al.; D2d Research Group. Intratrial exposure to
vitamin D and New-onset diabetes among adults
with prediabetes: a secondary analysis from the
vitamin D and type 2 diabetes (D2d) study.
Diabetes Care 2020;43:2916–2922
87. Zhang Y, Tan H, Tang J, et al. Effects of
vitamin D supplementation on prevention of
type 2 diabetes in patients with prediabetes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes
Care 2020;43:1650–1658
88. Barbarawi M, Zayed Y, Barbarawi O, et al.
Effect of vitamin D supplementation on the
incidence of diabetes mellitus. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2020;105:dgaa335
89. Pittas AG, Kawahara T, Jorde R, et al.Vitamin D
and risk for type 2 diabetes in people with
prediabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of individual participant data from 3 randomized
clinical trials. Ann Intern Med 2023;176:355–363
90. Diabetes Prevention Program Research
Group. Long-term safety, tolerability, and weight
loss associated with metformin in the Diabetes
Prevention Program Outcomes Study. Diabetes
Care 2012;35:731–737
91. Ratner RE, Christophi CA, Metzger BE, et al.;
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.
Prevention of diabetes in women with a history
of gestational diabetes: effects of metformin and
lifestyle interventions. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2008;93:4774–4779
92. Aroda VR, Christophi CA, Edelstein SL, et al.;
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.
The effect of lifestyle intervention and metformin
on
preventing
or
delaying
diabetes
among
women with and without gestational diabetes:
the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study
10-year follow-up. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2015;
100:1646–1653
93. Diabetes
Prevention
Program
Research
Group. Long-term effects of metformin on
diabetes prevention: identiﬁcation of subgroups
that beneﬁted most in the Diabetes Prevention
Program and Diabetes Prevention Program
Outcomes Study. Diabetes Care 2019;42:601–
608
94. Ramachandran A, Snehalatha C, Mary S,
Mukesh B, Bhaskar AD; Indian Diabetes Prevention
Programme (IDPP).The Indian Diabetes Prevention
Programme shows that lifestyle modiﬁcation and
metformin prevent type 2 diabetes in Asian Indian
subjects with impaired glucose tolerance (IDPP-1).
Diabetologia 2006;49:289–297
95. Zhang L, Zhang Y, Shen S, et al.; China
Diabetes Prevention Program Study Group. Safety
and effectiveness of metformin plus lifestyle
intervention compared with lifestyle intervention
alone in preventing progression to diabetes in a
Chinese population with impaired glucose
regulation: a multicentre, open-label, randomised
controlled
trial.
Lancet
Diabetes
Endocrinol
2023;11:567–577
96. Grifﬁn SJ, Bethel MA, Holman RR, et al.
Metformin in non-diabetic hyperglycaemia: the
GLINT feasibility RCT. Health Technol Assess 2018;
22:1–64
97. Aroda VR, Edelstein SL, Goldberg RB, et al.;
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.
Long-term metformin use and vitamin B12
deﬁciency in the Diabetes Prevention Program
Outcomes Study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;
101:1754–1761
98. de Jager J, Kooy A, Lehert P, et al. Long term
treatment with metformin in patients with type 2
diabetes and risk of vitamin B-12 deﬁciency:
randomised placebo controlled trial. BMJ 2010;
340:c2181
99. Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes
(KDIGO) Diabetes Work Group. KDIGO 2020 clinical
practice guideline for diabetes management in
chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int 2020;98(4S):
S1–S115
100. Ali MK, Bullard KM, Saydah S, Imperatore
G, Gregg EW. Cardiovascular and renal burdens
of prediabetes in the USA: analysis of data from
serial cross-sectional surveys, 1988-2014. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol 2018;6:392–403
101. Pan Y, Chen W, Wang Y. Prediabetes and
outcome of ischemic stroke or transient ischemic
attack: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J
Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 2019;28:683–692
102. Huang Y, Cai X, Mai W, Li M, Hu Y.
Association between prediabetes and risk of
cardiovascular disease and all cause mortality:
systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2016;
355:i5953
103. Yeh HC, Duncan BB, Schmidt MI, Wang NY,
Brancati FL. Smoking, smoking cessation, and risk
for type 2 diabetes mellitus: a cohort study. Ann
Intern Med 2010;152:10–17
104. Oba S, Noda M, Waki K, et al.; Japan Public
Health Center-Based Prospective Study Group.
Smoking cessation increases short-term risk of
type 2 diabetes irrespective of weight gain: the
Japan Public Health Center-Based Prospective
Study. PLoS One 2012;7:e17061
S50
Prevention or Delay of Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

105. Hu Y, Zong G, Liu G, et al. Smoking
cessation, weight change, type 2 diabetes, and
mortality. N Engl J Med 2018;379:623–632
106. Orchard TJ, Temprosa M, Barrett-Connor E,
et al.; Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes
Study Research Group. Long-term effects of the
Diabetes Prevention Program interventions on
cardiovascular risk factors: a report from the DPP
Outcomes Study. Diabet Med 2013;30:46–55
107. Salas-Salvado J, Dıaz-Lopez A, Ruiz-Canela
M, et al.; PREDIMED-Plus investigators. Effect of
a lifestyle intervention program with energy-
restricted mediterranean diet and exercise on
weight loss and cardiovascular risk factors: one-
year results of the PREDIMED-Plus trial. Diabetes
Care 2019;42:777–788
108. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al.
2019 ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention
of cardiovascular disease: a report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation
2019;140:e596–e646
109. Thakker D, Nair S, Pagada A, Jamdade V, Malik
A. Statin use and the risk of developing diabetes: a
network meta-analysis. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug
Saf 2016;25:1131–1149
110. Macedo AF, Douglas I, Smeeth L, Forbes H,
Ebrahim S. Statins and the risk of type 2 diabetes
mellitus: cohort study using the UK clinical
practice pesearch datalink. BMC Cardiovasc Disord
2014;14:85
111. Crandall JP, Mather K, Rajpathak SN, et al.
Statin use and risk of developing diabetes: results
from the Diabetes Prevention Program. BMJ
Open Diabetes Res Care 2017;5:e000438
112. Preiss D, Seshasai SR, Welsh P, et al. Risk of
incident diabetes with intensive-dose compared
with moderate-dose statin therapy: a meta-analysis.
JAMA 2011;305:2556–2564
113. Mansi IA, Chansard M, Lingvay I, Zhang S,
Halm EA, Alvarez CA. Association of statin
therapy initiation with diabetes progression: a
retrospective matched-cohort study. JAMA Intern
Med 2021;181:1562–1574
114. Ridker PM, Pradhan A, MacFadyen JG,
Libby P, Glynn RJ. Cardiovascular beneﬁts and
diabetes risks of statin therapy in primary
prevention: an analysis from the JUPITER trial.
Lancet 2012;380:565–571
115. Cai T, Abel L, Langford O, et al. Associations
between statins and adverse events in primary
prevention of cardiovascular disease: systematic
review with pairwise, network, and dose-response
meta-analyses. BMJ 2021;374:n1537
116. Kernan WN, Viscoli CM, Furie KL, et al.; IRIS
Trial Investigators. Pioglitazone after ischemic
stroke or transient ischemic attack. N Engl J Med
2016;374:1321–1331
117. Inzucchi SE, Viscoli CM, Young LH, et al.; IRIS
Trial Investigators. Pioglitazone prevents diabetes in
patients with insulin resistance and cerebrovascular
disease. Diabetes Care 2016;39:1684–1692
118. Spence JD, Viscoli CM, Inzucchi SE, et al.;
IRIS Investigators. Pioglitazone therapy in patients
with stroke and prediabetes: a post hoc analysis
of the IRIS randomized clinical trial. JAMA Neurol
2019;76:526–535
119. Saremi A, Schwenke DC, Buchanan TA, et al.
Pioglitazone slows progression of atherosclerosis in
prediabetes independent of changes in cardiovascular
risk factors [published correction appears in Arterioscler
Thromb Vasc Biol 2013;35:e114]. Arterioscler Thromb
VascBiol2013;33:393–399
120. Spence JD, Viscoli C, Kernan WN, et al.
Efﬁcacy of lower doses of pioglitazone after
stroke or transient ischaemic attack in patients
with insulin resistance. Diabetes Obes Metab
2022;24:1150–1158
121. Nadeau KJ, Anderson BJ, Berg EG, et al.
Youth-onset type 2 diabetes consensus report:
current status, challenges, and priorities. Diabetes
Care 2016;39:1635–1642
122. Rooney MR, Rawlings AM, Pankow JS, et al.
Risk of progression to diabetes among older
adults with prediabetes. JAMA Intern Med 2021;
181:511–519
123. Lachin JM, Christophi CA, Edelstein SL,
et al.; DDK Research Group. Factors associated
with diabetes onset during metformin versus
placebo therapy in the diabetes prevention
program. Diabetes 2007;56:1153–1159
124. Perreault L, Pan Q, Schroeder EB, et al.;
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.
Regression from prediabetes to normal glucose
regulation and prevalence of microvascular disease
in the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes
Study (DPPOS). Diabetes Care 2019;42:1809–1815
125. Chen Y, Zhang P, Wang J, et al. Associations
of progression to diabetes and regression to
normal glucose tolerance with development of
cardiovascular and microvascular disease among
people with impaired glucose tolerance: a
secondary analysis of the 30 year Da Qing Diabetes
Prevention Outcome Study. Diabetologia 2021;64:
1279–1287
126. Herold KC, Bundy BN, Long SA, et al.;
Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet Study Group. An anti-
CD3 antibody, teplizumab, in relatives at risk
for type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;381:
603–613
diabetesjournals.org/care
Prevention or Delay of Diabetes
S51
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

4. Comprehensive Medical
Evaluation and Assessment of
Comorbidities: Standards of Care
in Diabetes—2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S52–S76 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S004
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes”
includes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to
provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guide-
lines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional
Practice Committee, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for
updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a
detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the
evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full
list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction
and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are
invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
PERSON-CENTERED COLLABORATIVE CARE
Recommendations
4.1 A person-centered communication style that uses person-centered, culturally
sensitive, and strength-based language and active listening; elicits individual prefer-
ences and beliefs; and assesses literacy, numeracy, and potential barriers to care
should be used to optimize health outcomes and health-related quality of life. B
4.2 People with diabetes can beneﬁt from a coordinated interprofessional team
that may include and is not limited to diabetes care and education specialists,
primary care and subspecialty clinicians, nurses, registered dietitian nutritionists,
exercise specialists, pharmacists, dentists, podiatrists, and behavioral health pro-
fessionals. E
A successful medical evaluation depends on beneﬁcial interactions between the per-
son with diabetes and the care team. The Chronic Care Model (1–3) (see Section 1,
“Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations”) is a person-centered ap-
proach to care that requires a close working relationship between the person with di-
abetes and clinicians involved in treatment planning. People with diabetes should
receive health care from a coordinated interprofessional team that may include but is
not limited to diabetes care and education specialists, primary care and subspecialty
clinicians, nurses, registered dietitian nutritionists, exercise specialists, pharmacists,
dentists, podiatrists, behavioral health professionals, and community partners such as
community health workers and community paramedics. Individuals with diabetes and
their care partners must assume an active role in their care. Based on the preferences
*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee. 4. Comprehensive
medical evaluation and assessment of com-
orbidities: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2024.
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S52–S76
The BONE HEALTH subsection has received endorsement
from the American Society for Bone and Mineral
Research.
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
4. MEDICAL EVALUATION AND COMORBIDITIES
S52
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

and values of the person with diabetes,
elicited by the care team, the family or
support group and health care team to-
gether formulate the management plan,
which includes lifestyle management (see
Section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health
Behaviors and Well-being to Improve
Health Outcomes”).
The goals of treatment for diabetes are
to prevent or delay complications and op-
timize quality of life (Fig. 4.1). Treatment
goals and plans should be cocreated with
people with diabetes based on their indi-
vidual preferences, values, and goals. This
individualized management plan should
take into account the person’s age, cogni-
tive abilities, school/work schedule and
conditions, health beliefs, support sys-
tems, eating patterns, physical activity, so-
cial situation, ﬁnancial concerns, cultural
factors, literacy and numeracy (mathemat-
ical literacy), diabetes history (duration,
complications, and current use of medica-
tions), comorbidities, disabilities, health
priorities, other medical conditions, pref-
erences for care, access to health care
services, and life expectancy. People living
with diabetes should be engaged in con-
versation about these aspects of their
lives and diabetes management, with
routine reassessment as necessary given
their changing circumstances across the
life span.Various strategies and techniques
should be used to support the person’s
self-management efforts, including provid-
ing education on problem-solving skills for
all aspects ofdiabetes management.
Health care professional communication
with people with diabetes and families
should acknowledge that multiple factors
impact glycemic management but also
emphasize that collaboratively developed
treatment plans and a healthy lifestyle can
signiﬁcantly improve disease outcomes
and well-being (4–8). Thus, the goal of
communication between health care pro-
fessionals and people with diabetes is to
establish a collaborative relationship and to
assess and address self-management bar-
riers without blaming people with diabetes
for “noncompliance” or “nonadherence”
when the outcomes of self-management
are not optimal (9).The familiar terms non-
compliance and nonadherence denote a
passive, obedient role for a person with di-
abetes in “following doctor’s orders” that
is at odds with the active role people with
diabetes take in directing the day-to-day
decision-making, planning, monitoring,
evaluation, and problem-solving involved
in diabetes self-management. Using a non-
judgmental approach that normalizes peri-
odic lapses in management and the role
systemic factors play may help minimize
the person’s resistance to reporting prob-
lems with self-management. Empathizing
and using active listening techniques, such
as open-ended questions, reﬂective state-
ments, and summarizing what the person
said, can help facilitate communication.
Perceptions of people with diabetes about
their own ability, or self-efﬁcacy, to self-
manage diabetes constitute one important
psychosocial factor related to improved di-
abetes self-management and treatment
outcomes in diabetes (10–12) and should
be goals of ongoing assessment, educa-
tion, and treatment planning.
Figure 4.1—Decision cycle for person-centered glycemic management in type 2 diabetes. Adapted from Davies et al. (294). BGM, blood glucose
monitoring; BP, blood pressure; CGM, continuous glucose monitoring; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease;
DSMES, diabetes self-management education and support; HF, heart failure.
diabetesjournals.org/care
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S53
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Language has a strong impact on per-
ceptions and behavior. Empowering lan-
guage can help to inform and motivate,
while shame and judgement can be dis-
couraging. The American Diabetes Asso-
ciation (ADA) and the Association of
Diabetes Care & Education Specialists
(formerly called the American Associa-
tion of Diabetes Educators) joint con-
sensus report, “The Use of Language in
Diabetes Care and Education,” provides
the authors’ expert opinion regarding the
use of language by health care profes-
sionals when speaking or writing about
diabetes for people with diabetes or for
professional audiences (13). Although fur-
ther research is needed to address the im-
pact of language on diabetes outcomes,
the report includes ﬁve key consensus rec-
ommendations for language use:
• Use language that is neutral, non-
judgmental, and based on facts, ac-
tions, or physiology/biology.
• Use language free from stigma.
• Use language that is strength based, re-
spectful, and inclusive and that imparts
hope.
• Use language that fosters collabora-
tion between people with diabetes
and health care professionals.
• Use language that is person cen-
tered (e.g., “person with diabetes” is
preferred over “diabetic”).
COMPREHENSIVE MEDICAL
EVALUATION
Recommendations
4.3 A complete medical evaluation
should beperformed atthe initial visitto:
• Conﬁrm the diagnosis and classify
diabetes. A
• Evaluate for diabetes complications,
potential comorbid conditions, and
overall health status. A
• Identify care partners and sup-
port system. E
• Assess social determinants of health
and structural barriers to optimal
health and health care. A
• Review previous treatment and
risk factor management in people
with established diabetes. A
• Begin engagement with the person
with diabetes in the formulation of
a care management plan including
initial goals of care. A
• Develop a plan for continuing care. A
4.4 A follow-up visit should include most
components of the initial comprehensive
medicalevaluation(Table4.1).A
4.5 Ongoing management should be
guided by the assessment of overall
health status, diabetes complications,
cardiovascular risk, hypoglycemia risk,
and shared decision-making to set
therapeutic goals. B
The comprehensive medical evaluation
includes the initial and follow-up evalua-
tions, assessment of complications, psy-
chosocial assessment, management of
comorbid conditions, overall health, func-
tionalandcognitivestatus,andengagement
of the person with diabetes throughout the
process.While a comprehensive list is pro-
vided in Table 4.1, in clinical practice the
health care professional may need to pri-
oritize the components of the medical
evaluation given the available resources
and time. Engaging other members of the
health care team can also support com-
prehensive diabetes care. The goal of
these recommendations is to provide the
health care team information so it can op-
timally support people with diabetes and
their care partners. In addition to the
medical history, physical examination, and
laboratory tests, health care professionals
should assess diabetes self-management
behaviors, nutrition, social determinants
of health, and psychosocial health (see
Section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health
Behaviors and Well-being to Improve
Health Outcomes”) and give guidance on
routine immunizations.The assessment of
sleep pattern and duration should be con-
sidered. Interval follow-up visits should oc-
cur at least every 3–6 months individualized
to the person and then at least annually.
Lifestyle management and behavioral
health care are cornerstones of diabetes
management. People with diabetes should
be referred for diabetes self-management
education and support, medical nutrition
therapy, and assessment of behavioral
health concerns as appropriate. People
with diabetes should receive recommended
preventive care services (e.g., immuniza-
tions and cancer screening); smoking ces-
sation counseling; and ophthalmological,
dental, podiatric, and other referrals, as
needed.
The assessment of risk of acute and
chronic diabetes complications and treat-
ment planning are key components of ini-
tial and follow-up visits (Table 4.2). The
risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease and heart failure (see Section
10, “Cardiovascular Disease and Risk
Management”), chronic kidney disease
staging (see Section 11, “Chronic Kidney
Disease and Risk Management”), pres-
ence of retinopathy and presence of neu-
ropathy (see Section 12, “Retinopathy,
Neuropathy, and Foot Care”), and risk of
treatment-associated hypoglycemia should
be used to individualize goals for glycemia
(see Section 6, “Glycemic Goals and
Hypoglycemia”), blood pressure, and lipids
and toselect speciﬁcglucose-loweringmed-
ication(s) (see Section 9, “Pharmacologic
Approaches to Glycemic Treatment”), anti-
hypertension medication(s), and statin treat-
ment intensity.
Additional referrals should be arranged
as necessary (Table 4.3). Clinicians should
ensure that people with diabetes are ap-
propriately screened for complications,
comorbidities, and treatment burden. Dis-
cussing and implementing an approach to
glycemic management with the person is
a part, not the sole goal, of the clinical
encounter.
IMMUNIZATIONS
Recommendation
4.6 Provide routinely recommended
vaccinations for children and adults
with diabetes as indicated by age
(see Table 4.4). A
Children and adults with diabetes should
receive vaccinations according to age-
appropriate recommendations (14,15). The
Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion (CDC) provides vaccination schedules
speciﬁcally for children, adolescents, and
adults with diabetes (cdc.gov/vaccines/).
The CDC Advisory Committee on Immuni-
zation Practices (ACIP) makes recommen-
dations based on its own review and rating
of the evidence, provided in Table 4.4 for
selected vaccinations. The ACIP evidence re-
view has evolved over time with the adop-
tion of Grading of Recommendations Assess-
ment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE)
in 2010 and then the Evidence to Decision
or Evidence to Recommendation frame-
works in 2020 (16). Here, we discuss the
particular importance of speciﬁc vaccines.
COVID-19
People with underlying medical condi-
tions, including diabetes, are more likely
S54
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Personal history of autoimmune disease
Personal history of autoimmune disease
Table 4.1 - Components of the comprehensive diabetes
Table 4.1 - Components of the comprehensive diabetes
medical evaluation at initial, follow-up, and annual visits
medical evaluation at initial, follow-up, and annual visits
INITIAL
INITIAL
VISIT
VISIT
ANNUAL
ANNUAL
VISIT
VISIT
EVERY
EVERY
FOLLOW-
FOLLOW-
UP VISIT
UP VISIT
Characteristics at onset (e.g., age, symptoms)
Characteristics at onset (e.g., age, symptoms)
Diabetes history
Diabetes history
Family history
Family history
Interval history
Interval history
Social network
Social network
Personal history of complications and common comorbidities
Personal history of complications and common comorbidities
Review of previous treatment plans and response
Review of previous treatment plans and response
Assess frequency/cause/severity of past hospitalizations
Assess frequency/cause/severity of past hospitalizations
Family history of diabetes in a first-degree relative
Family history of diabetes in a first-degree relative
Family history of autoimmune disorder
Family history of autoimmune disorder
Common comorbidities (e.g., obesity, OSA, NAFLD)
Common comorbidities (e.g., obesity, OSA, NAFLD)
High blood pressure or abnormal lipids
High blood pressure or abnormal lipids
Macrovascular and microvascular complications
Macrovascular and microvascular complications
Hypoglycemia: awareness/frequency/causes/timing of episodes
Hypoglycemia: awareness/frequency/causes/timing of episodes
Presence of hemoglobinopathies or anemias
Presence of hemoglobinopathies or anemias
Last dental visit
Last dental visit
Last dilated eye exam
Last dilated eye exam
Visits to specialists
Visits to specialists
Changes in medical/family history since last visit
Changes in medical/family history since last visit
Assess familiarity with carbohydrate counting (e.g., type 1 diabetes,
Assess familiarity with carbohydrate counting (e.g., type 1 diabetes,
type 2 diabetes treated with MDI)
type 2 diabetes treated with MDI)
Eating patterns and weight history
Eating patterns and weight history
Tobacco, alcohol, and substance use
Tobacco, alcohol, and substance use
Current medication plan
Current medication plan
Complementary and alternative medicine use
Complementary and alternative medicine use
Vaccination history and needs
Vaccination history and needs
Glucose monitoring (meter/CGM): results and data use
Glucose monitoring (meter/CGM): results and data use
Identify existing social supports
Identify existing social supports
Identify social determinants of health (e.g., food security, housing
Identify social determinants of health (e.g., food security, housing
stability & homelessness, transportation access, financial security,
stability & homelessness, transportation access, financial security,
community safety)
community safety)
Assess daily routine and environment, including school/work schedules
Assess daily routine and environment, including school/work schedules
and ability to engage in diabetes self-management
and ability to engage in diabetes self-management
Identify surrogate decision maker, advanced care plan
Identify surrogate decision maker, advanced care plan
Review insulin pump settings and use, connected pen and glucose data
Review insulin pump settings and use, connected pen and glucose data
Assess use of health apps, online education, patient portals, etc.
Assess use of health apps, online education, patient portals, etc.
Medication intolerance or side effects
Medication intolerance or side effects
Medication-taking behavior, including rationing of medications and/or
Medication-taking behavior, including rationing of medications and/or
medical equipment
medical equipment
Physical activity and sleep behaviors; screen for obstructive sleep apnea
Physical activity and sleep behaviors; screen for obstructive sleep apnea
Disability assessment and use of assistive devices (e.g., physical,
Disability assessment and use of assistive devices (e.g., physical,
cognitive, vision and auditory, history of fractures, podiatry)
cognitive, vision and auditory, history of fractures, podiatry)
Continued on p. S5
diabetesjournals.org/care
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S55
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

to become severely ill with coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) (see
DIABETES
AND
COVID-19 section below). COVID-19
vaccinations and boosters are recom-
mended for everyone ages 6 months
and older in the U.S. for the prevention
of COVID-19 (17).
Hepatitis B
Compared with the general population,
people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes
have higher rates of hepatitis. Because of
the higher likelihood of transmission, hepa-
titis B vaccine is recommended for adults
with diabetes aged <60 years. For adults
aged $60 years, hepatitis B vaccine may
be administered at the discretion of the
treating clinician based on the person’s
likelihood of acquiring hepatitis B infection
(18).
Influenza
Inﬂuenza is a common, preventable infec-
tious disease associated with high mortality
Table 4.1 (cont.) - Components of the comprehensive diabetes
medical evaluation at initial, follow-up, and annual visits
INITIAL
VISIT
EVERY
FOLLOW-
UP VISIT
Comprehensive foot examination
Screen for depression, anxiety, diabetes distress, fear of hypoglycemia, and 
disordered eating
Consider assessment for cognitive performance*
Consider assessment for functional performance*
Visual inspection (e.g., skin integrity, callous formation, foot
deformity or ulcer, toenails)**
Determination of temperature, vibration or pinprick sensation,
and 10-g monoﬁlament exam
Height, weight, and BMI; growth/pubertal development in children and
adolescents
Blood pressure determination
Orthostatic blood pressure measures (when indicated)
Fundoscopic examination (refer to eye specialist)
Thyroid palpation
Skin examination (e.g., acanthosis nigricans, insulin injection or
insertion sites, lipodystrophy)
A1C, if the results are not available within the past 3 months
If not performed/available within the past year
Liver function tests#
Spot urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio
Serum creatinine and estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate+
Thyroid-stimulating hormone in people with type 1 diabetes#
Vitamin B12 if on metformin
Serum potassium levels in people with diabetes on ACE inhibitors, ARBs, 
or diuretics+
Lipid proﬁle, including total, LDL, and HDL cholesterol and
triglycerides#
LABORATORY
EVALUATION
PHYSICAL
EXAMINATION
ABI, ankle-brachial pressure index; ARBs, angiotensin receptor blockers; CGM, continuous glucose monitors;
MDI, multiple daily injections; NAFLD, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea; PAD, peripheral arterial disease.
*At 65 years of age or older.
+May be needed more frequently in people with diabetes with known chronic kidney disease or with changes in medications that affect kidney 
function and serum potassium (see Table 11.1).
#May also need to be checked after initiation or dose changes of medications that affect these laboratory values (i.e., diabetes medications, 
blood pressure medications, cholesterol medications, or thyroid medications).
^In people without dyslipidemia and not on cholesterol-lowering therapy, testing may be less frequent.
**Should be performed at every visit in people with diabetes with sensory loss, previous foot ulcers, or amputations.
ANNUAL
VISIT
Complete blood count (CBC) with platelets
Consider assessment for bone pain
Calcium, vitamin D, and phosphorous for appropriate people with diabetes
Screen for PAD (pedal pulses—refer for ABI if diminished)
S56
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

and morbidity in vulnerable populations,
including youth, older adults, and people
with chronic diseases. Inﬂuenzavaccination
in people with diabetes has been found to
signiﬁcantly reduce inﬂuenza and diabetes-
related hospital admissions (19). In people
with diabetes and cardiovascular disease,
inﬂuenza vaccine has been associated with
lower risk of all-cause mortality, cardiovas-
cular mortality, and cardiovascular events
(20). Given the beneﬁts of the annual in-
ﬂuenza vaccination, it is recommended
for all individuals $6 months of age who
do not have a contraindication. The live
attenuated inﬂuenza vaccine, which is de-
livered by nasal spray, is an option for
people who are 2–49 years of age and
who are not pregnant, but people with
chronic conditions such as diabetes are
cautioned
against
taking
the
live
attenuated inﬂuenza vaccine and are in-
stead recommended to receive the inac-
tive or recombinant inﬂuenza vaccination.
For individuals $65 years of age, there
may be additional beneﬁt from the high-
dose quadrivalent inactivated inﬂuenza
vaccine (21).
Pneumococcal Pneumonia
Like inﬂuenza, pneumococcal pneumonia
is a common, preventable disease. People
with diabetes are at increased risk for
pneumococcal infection and have been re-
ported to have a high risk of hospitaliza-
tion and death, with a mortality rate as
high as 50% (22). There are two types of
vaccines available in the U.S., pneumococ-
cal conjugate vaccines (PCV13, PCV15, and
PCV20) and pneumococcal polysaccharide
vaccine (PPSV23), with distinct schedules
for children and adults.
It is recommended that all children re-
ceive a four-dose series of PCV13 or
PCV15 by 15 months of age. For children
with diabetes who have incomplete se-
ries by ages 2–5 years, the CDC recom-
mends a catch-up schedule to ensure
that these children have four doses. Chil-
dren with diabetes between 6 and 18 years
of age are also advised to receive one
dose of PPSV23, preferably after receipt
of PCV13.
Adults aged $65 years whose vac-
cine status is unknown or who have not
received pneumococcal vaccine should
receive one dose of PCV15 or PCV20. If
PCV15 is used, it should be followed by
PPSV23.
Adults aged 19–64 years with certain
underlying risk factors or other medical
conditions whose vaccine status is un-
known or who have not received pneu-
mococcal vaccine should receive one
dose of PCV15 or PCV20. As for adults
aged $65 years, if PCV15 is used, it
should be followed by PPSV23.
The recommended interval between
PCV15 and PPSV23 is $1 year. If PPSV23 is
the only dose received, PCV15 or PCV20
may be given $1 year later.
For adults with immunocompromising
conditions, cochlear implant, or cerebro-
spinal ﬂuid leak, a minimum interval of
8 weeks can be considered for dosing of
PCV15 and PPSV23 when PCV15 has been
used.
Adults who received PCV13 should fol-
low the previously recommended PPSV23
series (23–26). Adults who received only
PPSV23 may receive PCV15 or PCV20
$1 year after their last dose.
Respiratory Syncytial Virus
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a cause
of respiratory illness in older adults. Peo-
ple with chronic conditions such as diabe-
tes have a higher risk of severe illness.The
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) ap-
proved the ﬁrst vaccines for prevention of
RSV-associated lower respiratory tract dis-
ease in adults aged $60 years. On 21 June
2023, ACIP voted to recommend that
adults aged $60 years may receive a sin-
gle dose of an RSV vaccine, using shared
clinical decision-making.The ACIP Respira-
tory Syncytial Virus Vaccines Adult Work
Group continues to monitor the efﬁcacy
Table 4.2—Assessment and treatment plan
Assessing risk of diabetes complications
 ASCVD and heart failure history
 ASCVD risk factors and 10-year ASCVD risk assessment
 Staging of chronic kidney disease (see Table 11.1)
 Hypoglycemia risk (see Section 6, “Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia”)
 Assessment for retinopathy
 Assessment for neuropathy
 Assessment for NAFLD/NASH
Goal setting
 Set A1C/blood glucose/time in range
 If hypertension is present, establish blood pressure goal
 Weight management and physical activity goals
 Diabetes self-management goals
Therapeutic treatment plans
 Lifestyle management
 Pharmacologic therapy: glucose lowering
 Pharmacologic therapy: cardiovascular and kidney disease risk factors
 Weight management with pharmacotherapy or metabolic surgery, as appropriate
 Use of glucose monitoring and insulin delivery devices
 Referral to diabetes education, behavioral health, and medical specialists
Assessment and treatment planning are essential components of initial and all follow-up vis-
its. ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; NAFLD, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease;
NASH, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis.
Table 4.3—Referrals for initial care management
 Eye care professional for annual dilated eye exam
 Family planning for individuals of childbearing potential
 Registered dietitian nutritionist for medical nutrition therapy
 Diabetes self-management education and support
 Dentist for comprehensive dental and periodontal examination
 Behavioral health professional, if indicated
 Audiology, if indicated
 Social worker/community resources, if indicated
 Rehabilitation medicine or another relevant health care professional for physical and
cognitive disability evaluation, if indicated
 Other appropriate health care professionals
diabetesjournals.org/care
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S57
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Table 4.4—Highly recommended immunizations for adults with diabetes (Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Vaccine
Recommended ages
Schedule
GRADE evidence type*
References
COVID-19
Recommended for all
6 months of age
and older
Current initial vaccination
and boosters
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Interim Clinical
Considerations for Use of COVID-19
Vaccines, 2023 (295)
Hepatitis B
Recommended for adults with
diabetes aged <60 years; for
adults aged $60 years,
hepatitis B vaccine may be
administered at the discretion
of the treating clinician based
on the person’s likelihood of
acquiring hepatitis B infection
Weng et al., Universal Hepatitis B
Vaccination in Adults Aged 19–59
Years: Updated Recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices—United
States, 2022 (18)
Inﬂuenza
All people with diabetes advised
not to receive live attenuated
inﬂuenza vaccine
Annual
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Prevention and Control
of Seasonal Inﬂuenza with Vaccines:
Recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Immunization
Practices—United States, 2023–24
Inﬂuenza Season (296)
Pneumonia (PPSV23
[Pneumovax])
19–64 years of age, vaccinate
with Pneumovax
One dose is recommended for those who
previously received PCV13; if PCV15
was used, follow with PPSV23 $1 year
later; PPSV23 is not indicated after
PCV20; adults who received only
PPSV23 may receive PCV15 or PCV20
$1 year after their last dose
2
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Updated
Recommendations for Prevention of
Invasive Pneumococcal Disease
Among Adults Using the 23-Valent
Pneumococcal Polysaccharide
Vaccine (PPSV23) (23)
$65 years of age
One dose is recommended for those
who previously received PCV13; if
PCV15 was used, follow with PPSV23
$1 year later; PPSV23 is not
indicated after PCV20; adults who
received only PPSV23 may receive
PCV15 or PCV20 $1 year after their
last dose
2
Falkenhorst et al., Effectiveness of the
23-Valent Pneumococcal
Polysaccharide Vaccine (PPV23)
Against Pneumococcal Disease in
the Elderly: Systematic Review and
Meta-analysis (24)
PCV20 or PCV15
Adults 19–64 years of age, with
an immunocompromising
condition (e.g., chronic renal
failure), cochlear implant, or
cerebrospinal ﬂuid leak
One dose of PCV15 or PCV20 is
recommended by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention
3
Kobayashi et al., Use of 15-Valent
Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine
and 20-Valent Pneumococcal
Conjugate Vaccine Among U.S.
Adults: Updated Recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices—United
States, 2022 (25)
19–64 years of age,
immunocompetent
For those who have never received any
pneumococcal vaccine, the CDC
recommends one dose of PCV15 or
PCV20
$65 years of age,
immunocompetent, have
shared decision-making
discussion with health care
professionals
One dose of PCV15 or PCV20; PCSV23
may be given $8 weeks after PCV15;
PPSV23 is not indicated after PCV20
RSV
Older adults $60 years of age
with diabetes appear to be a
risk group
Adults aged $60 years may receive a
single dose of an RSV vaccine
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, CDC Recommends RSV
Vaccine for Older Adults (29)
Tetanus, diphtheria,
pertussis (Tdap)
All adults; pregnant individuals
should have an extra dose
Booster every 10 years
2 for effectiveness,
3 for safety
Havers et al., Use of Tetanus Toxoid,
Reduced Diphtheria Toxoid, and
Acellular Pertussis Vaccines:
Updated Recommendations of the
Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices—United
States, 2019 (297)
Continued on p. S59
S58
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

of these vaccines among adults aged
$60 years (27–29).
ASSESSMENT OF COMORBIDITIES
Besides assessing diabetes-related com-
plications, clinicians and people with
diabetes need to be aware of common
comorbidities that affect people with dia-
betes and that may complicate manage-
ment (30–32). Diabetes comorbidities are
conditions that affect people with diabe-
tes more often than age-matched people
without diabetes. This section discusses
many of the common comorbidities ob-
served in people with diabetes but is not
necessarily inclusive of all the conditions
that have been reported.
Autoimmune Diseases
Recommendations
4.7 People with type 1 diabetes should
be screened for autoimmune thyroid
disease soon after diagnosis and peri-
odically thereafter. B
4.8 Adults with type 1 diabetes should
be screened for celiac disease in the
presence of gastrointestinal symptoms,
signs, laboratory manifestations, or clin-
ical suspicion suggestive of celiac dis-
ease. B
People with type 1 diabetes are at in-
creased risk for other autoimmune dis-
eases, with thyroid disease, celiac disease,
and pernicious anemia (vitamin B12
deﬁciency) being among the most com-
mon (33). Other associated conditions
include autoimmune liver disease, pri-
mary adrenal insufﬁciency (Addison dis-
ease), collagen vascular diseases, and
myasthenia gravis (34–37). Type 1 diabe-
tes may also occur with other autoim-
mune diseases in the context of speciﬁc
genetic disorders or polyglandular auto-
immune syndromes (38). Given the high
prevalence, nonspeciﬁc symptoms, and in-
sidious onset of primary hypothyroidism,
routine screening for thyroid dysfunction is
recommended for all people with type 1
diabetes. Screening for celiac disease
should be considered in adults with dia-
betes with suggestive symptoms (e.g.,
diarrhea, malabsorption, and abdominal
pain) or signs (e.g., osteoporosis, vitamin
deﬁciencies, and iron deﬁciency anemia)
(39,40). Measurement of vitamin B12
levels should be considered for people
with type 1 diabetes and peripheral neu-
ropathy or unexplained anemia.
Bone Health
Recommendations
4.9 Fracture risk should be assessed
in older adults with diabetes as a
part of routine care in diabetes clin-
ical practice, according to risk fac-
tors and comorbidities. A
4.10 Monitor bone mineral density
using dual-energy X-ray absorptiome-
try of high-risk older adults with dia-
betes (aged >65 years) and younger
individuals with diabetes and multiple
risk factors every 2–3 years. A
4.11 Clinicians should consider the po-
tential adverse impact on bone health
when selecting pharmacological op-
tions to lower glucose levels in people
with diabetes. Prioritizing medications
with a proven safety proﬁle for bones
is recommended, particularly for those
at elevated risk for fractures. A
4.12 To reduce the risk of falls and
fractures, glycemic management goals
should be individualized for people
with diabetes at a higher risk of frac-
ture. C Prioritize use of glucose-lowering
medications that are associated with
low risk for hypoglycemia to avoid
falls. E
Table 4.4—Continued
Vaccine
Recommended ages
Schedule
GRADE evidence type*
References
Zoster
$50 years of age
Two-dose Shingrix, even if
previously vaccinated
1
Dooling et al., Recommendations of
the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices for Use of
Herpes Zoster Vaccines (298)
For a comprehensive list of vaccines, refer to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention web site at cdc.gov/vaccines/. Advisory Commit-
tee on Immunization Practices recommendations can be found at cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recommendations. GRADE, Grading of Recommendations
Assessment, Development, and Evaluation; PCV13, 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine; PCV15, 15-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine;
PCV 20, 20-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine; PPSV23, 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine. *Evidence type: 1, randomized con-
trolled trials (RCTs) or overwhelming evidence from observational studies; 2, RCTs with important limitations or exceptionally strong evidence
from observational studies; 3, observational studies or RCTs with notable limitations; 4, clinical experience and observations, observational
studies with important limitations, or RCTs with several major limitations.
Table 4.5—General and diabetes-speciﬁc risk factors for fracture
General risk factors
 Prior osteoporotic fracture
 Age >65 years
 Low BMI
 Sex
 Malabsorption
 Recurrent falls
 Glucocorticoid use
 Family history
 Alcohol/tobacco abuse
 Rheumatoid arthritis
Diabetes-speciﬁc risk factors
 Lumbar spine or hip T-score #2.0
 Frequent hypoglycemic events
 Diabetes duration >10 years
 Diabetes medications: insulin, thiazolidinediones, sulfonylurea
 A1C >8%
 Peripheral and autonomic neuropathy
 Retinopathy and nephropathy
diabetesjournals.org/care
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S59
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

4.13 Advise people with diabetes on
their intake of calcium and vitamin D
to ensure it meets the recommended
daily allowance for those at risk for
fracture, either through their diet or
supplemental means. B
4.14 Antiresorptive medications and
osteoanabolic agents should be con-
sidered for people with diabetes who
have low bone mineral density with a
T-score #2.0 or have experienced
fragility fractures. B
Fracture risk has traditionally relied on
measurements of bone mineral density
(BMD) and the World Health Organization–
deﬁned T-score of #2.5 SD. However, it is
now established that the consideration of
other risk factors improves the categoriza-
tion of fracture risk (Table 4.5). There are
factors beyond BMD testing that contribute
to bone strength in people with diabetes.
Hip or vertebral fracture with low trauma
in people aged $65 years is diagnostic
for osteoporosis independent of BMD
and is one of the strongest risk factors
for subsequent fractures, especially in the
ﬁrst 1–2 years after a fracture (41,42). Os-
teoporotic hip fractures are associated
with signiﬁcant morbidity, mortality, and
societal costs (43). It is estimated that 20%
of individuals do not survive to 1 year after
hip fracture, while 60% do not regain their
prior functionality, living with permanent
disability (44).
Hip fractures in people with diabetes
are associated with higher risk of mor-
tality (28% in women and 57% in men),
longer recovery, and delayed healing
(45) compared with individuals without
diabetes.
Epidemiology and Risk Factors
Age-speciﬁc fracture risk is signiﬁcantly
increased in people with type 1 or type 2
diabetes in both sexes, with a 34% in-
crease in fracture risk compared with
those without diabetes (46).
Type 1 Diabetes. Fracture risk in people
with type 1 diabetes is increased by
4.35 times for hip fractures, 1.83 times
for upper limb fractures, and 1.97 times
for ankle fractures (47). Fractures occur
even at young ages, 10–15 years earlier
than they do in people without diabetes,
and are less frequent at the vertebral
level. Type 1 diabetes is often associated
with low bone mass, although BMD
underestimates the high risk of fracture
observed even in young individuals (47).
Type 2 Diabetes. In people with type 2
diabetes, hip fracture risk is increased
by 1.79 times, and risk throughout life
is 40–70% higher than in it is in individ-
uals without diabetes (46,48). Fracture
risk is increased also in the upper limbs
and ankle. Hip fracture risk is increased
even at early stages of the disease de-
spite normal or higher BMD (49,50).
However, bone loss is accelerated, and
low BMD remains an independent risk
factor for fractures (51).
Glucose control signiﬁcantly impacts
fracture risk in people with diabetes. A
meta-analysis revealed an 8% increased
fracture risk per 1% rise in A1C level
(risk ratio [RR] 1.08 [95% CI 1.03–1.14])
(52). Poor glycemic control (A1C >9%)
over 2 years in individuals with type 2
diabetes correlated with a 29% height-
ened fracture risk (53). Notably, this risk
was higher in the White demographic
than in other racial groups. Hypoglyce-
mia also escalated the risk of fractures
at the hip and other skeletal sites (RR
1.52 [95% CI 1.23–1.88]) (52). A Japa-
nese study echoed these ﬁndings, show-
ing a fracture risk increase (hazard ratio
[HR] 2.24 [95% CI 1.56–3.21]) with se-
vere hypoglycemia episodes (54).
Longer disease duration further ele-
vates fracture risk (55); data indicate indi-
viduals with T2D for >10 years and those
with type 1 diabetes for >26 years face
signiﬁcantly higher fracture risks, which
are largely attributed to ensuing micro-
vascular and macrovascular damage af-
fecting the skeleton. Additionally, high
fracture risk is seen in people with car-
diovascular issues, nephropathy, retinop-
athy, neuropathy, and frequent falls (45,
56–59).
Certain glucose-lowering medications
also factor into fracture risk. Studies have
reported increased fracture incidences in
women using thiazolidinediones (TZD),
with the risk doubling with 1–2 years of
TZD use (HR 2.23 [95% CI 1.65–3.01])
(60,61). According to the Action to Control
Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes (ACCORD)
study, reduced risk is noted in women who
had discontinued TZD use for 1–2 years
(HR 0.57 [95% CI 0.35–0.92]) or >2 years
(HR 0.42 [95% CI 0.24–0.74]) compared
with current users (62). Furthermore, indi-
viduals with type 2 diabetes on insulin (RR
1.49 [95% CI 1.29–1.73]) or sulfonylurea
(RR 1.30 [95% CI 1.18–1.43]) treatment ex-
hibit a heightened fracture risk (63).
Screening
Most evidence on screening in individu-
als at risk for fracture is available from
people with type 2 diabetes, while frac-
ture risk prediction in type 1 diabetes
has not been explored. Health care pro-
fessionals should assess fracture history
and risk factors in older people with di-
abetes and recommend measurement
of BMD if appropriate according to the
individual’s age and sex.
Type 2 Diabetes. People with type 2 diabe-
tes have 5–10% higher BMD than people
without diabetes. A T-score adjustment of
0.5 has been proposed to improve frac-
ture prediction by dual-energy X-ray ab-
sorptiometry (DXA). For example, a T-score
#2.0 should be interpreted as equiva-
lent to 2.5 in a person without diabetes
(51). Notably, the Fracture Risk Assessment
Tool (FRAX), although useful, does not fac-
tor in type 2 diabetes; an inclusion of the
condition is estimated to mirror the effect
of either a 10-year age increase or a
0.5 SD reduction in BMD T-score (64).
Fracture risk was higher in large obser-
vational studies in participants with dia-
betes compared with those without
diabetes for a given T-score and age or
for a given FRAX score (51). Additionally,
integrating the diagnosis of rheumatoid
arthritis in FRAX can potentially improve
fracture risk prediction for people with
type 2 diabetes. Growing evidence sug-
gests that fracture risk prediction is en-
hanced by use of trabecular bone score
(64), although such studies are not available
for individuals with type 1 diabetes and are
based on data from the U.S. or Canada.
In people with type 2 diabetes, in the
absence of other comorbidities, DXA scan
should be performed at least 5 years after
the diagnosis of diabetes, and reassess-
ment is recommended every 2–3 years
(64) depending on the screening evalua-
tion and the presence of additional risk
factors (Table 4.5). According to the Euro-
pean Association for the Study of Obesity
(EASO), DXA should be performed every
two years in subjects undergoing bariatric-
metabolic surgery.
Bone turnover markers are commonly
used in clinical practice, although they
are suppressed in people with diabetes
and have not been shown to predict frac-
ture risk (65).
S60
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Type 1 Diabetes. Because hip fracture
risk in type 1 diabetes starts to increase
after the age of 50, clinicians may con-
sider assessing BMD after the 5th de-
cade of life (47). In people with type 1
diabetes, BMD underestimates fracture
risk, but studies do not address the ex-
tent of underestimation of fracture risk.
According to the International Society
for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes
(ISPAD), regular assessment of bone health
using bone densitometry in youth with
type 1 diabetes is still controversial and
not recommended, but it may be con-
sidered in association with celiac dis-
ease because of the involvement of
inﬂammatory pathways (66).
Management
Maintaining glucose control and minimiz-
ing hypoglycemic episodes are crucial for
bone health in people with diabetes. Indi-
viduals with prolonged disease, microvas-
cular and macrovascular complications,
or frequent hypoglycemic episodes face
higher fracture risks and fall risks due to
factors like sarcopenia and impaired gait.
Health care professionals should advo-
cate moderate physical activity to en-
hance muscle health, gait coordination,
and balance as part of fracture preventive
strategies (58,59,67).
Aerobic and weight-bearing exercise
should be recommended to counteract
the potential negative effect of weight
loss on bone; speciﬁc guidelines have
been published for older adults with
type 2 diabetes (68).
Osteoporosis and fracture prevention
are ﬁrst based on measures applied to the
general population. All people with diabe-
tes should receive an adequate daily in-
take of proteins, calcium, and vitamin D,
stop smoking, and have regular physical
activity (69–71).
Intake of calcium should reﬂect the age-
speciﬁc recommendations of the general
populationand shouldbeobtained through
diet and/or oral supplements (72).
The optimal level of 25-hydroxyvitamin D
is a matter of controversy (73), although
serum levels $20 ng/mL are generally
thought to be sufﬁcient (74). Because di-
abetes is a risk factor for fractures, other
guidelines suggest a goal >30 ng/mL
(75).
The safe upper limit is also a matter of
debate, and there is substantial disagree-
ment over whether to treat to a speciﬁed
serum level. In the U.S., the recommended
daily allowance of vitamin D is 600 IU for
people aged 51–70 years and 800 IU for
people aged >70 years (74). In clinical prac-
tice, this dose of supplement is often not
enough to reach recommended goals, and
higher doses of D2 or D3 may be needed.
Fractures are main determinants of
frailty, a predisability condition that should
be mitigated with individualized interven-
tions to prevent falls, maintain mobility,
and delay disability (68). In many circum-
stances, conservative management (cal-
cium, vitamin D, and lifestyle measures) are
not enough to reduce fracture risk. When
pharmacological treatment is needed,
medication decision-making strategies
are the same as those used for the general
population. Antiosteoporosis medications
reduce bone resorption (bisphosphonates,
selective estrogen receptor modulators,
and denosumab), stimulate bone forma-
tion (teriparatide and abaloparatide), or
have dual actions by stimulating bone for-
mation and reducing bone resorption (ro-
mosozumab). These agents improve bone
density and reduce the risk of vertebral
and
nonvertebral
fractures.
Although
there are no studies speciﬁcally designed
for people with diabetes, data on antire-
sorptives and osteoanabolic agents sug-
gest similar efﬁcacy in type 2 diabetes
compared with individuals without diabe-
tes (76–78). Using individual patient data
from randomized trials, antiresorptive
therapies show similar effects in people
with and without type 2 diabetes for ver-
tebral, hip, and nonvertebral fractures
(76). No similar studies of efﬁcacy of anti-
osteoporosis treatment in people with
type 1 diabetes have been published.
Primary Prevention of Fragility Fractures
in People With Diabetes. In the general
population, a T-score #2.5 is the thresh-
old to consider pharmacological treatment
for osteoporosis. In type 2 diabetes, since
T-score underestimates fracture risk (as
discussed above), a T-score #2.0 may
be more appropriate for considering initi-
ation of a ﬁrst-line drug, including bi-
sphosphonates (alendronate, risedronate,
and zoledronate) or denosumab.
Denosumab is preferred in individu-
als with estimated glomerular ﬁltration
rate <30–35 mL/min/1.73 m2. Self-
managementabilities of the person with di-
abetes should be considered in medication
selection, as there can be rebound bone
loss with missed doses of denosumab or
delays in care. Zoledronic acid may be
more appropriate in these cases.
Secondary Prevention of Fragility Fractures.
The risk of subsequent fracture in indi-
viduals with hip or vertebral fracture is
signiﬁcantly high, especially in the ﬁrst
1–2 years after a fracture. Antiosteopo-
rosis treatment reduces the risk of frac-
ture in older individuals with prior hip
or vertebral fracture.
As in the general population, people
with diabetes who experience fragility
fracture should 1) be given the diagnosis
of osteoporosis regardless of DXA data
and 2) receive therapy to prevent future
fractures (79). Individuals at particularly
high risk (or those with multiple comor-
bidities) should be referred to a bone
metabolic specialist. In these cases, a
specialist may choose to initiate an os-
teoanabolic agent to optimize bone for-
mation and reduce immediate fracture
risk (80). It is strongly recommended that
all individuals with a fragility fracture be
started on antiosteoporosis therapy and
adequate calcium and vitamin D supple-
mentation, if needed, as early as possi-
ble, even during hospitalization (79).
There are some additional considera-
tions related to medication selection in
people with diabetes. Data from a phase 3
trial and population studies have indicated
positive effects of denosumab on fasting
glucose and on diabetes prevention. The
Fracture Reduction Evaluation of Denosu-
mab in Osteoporosis Every 6 Months
(FREEDOM) trial and its 10-year extension
have shown that people with diabetes
treated with denosumab experience sig-
niﬁcant improvements in BMD and lower
vertebral fracture risk but higher risk of
nonvertebral fractures (81). Romosozu-
mab, a newer anabolic medication, may
be associated with increased risk of myo-
cardial infarction and stroke, limiting its
use in people with diabetes at higher risk
for cardiovascular compilations (82,83).
Glucose-Lowering Medications and Bone
Health
Care plans for type 2 diabetes treatment
should consider individual fracture risk
and the potential effect of medications on
bone metabolism. Medications other than
TZD are advisable for postmenopausal
women or elderly men with type 2 diabe-
tes due to their safer bone health proﬁles.
While several studies have shown metfor-
min has a safe proﬁle, special attention
diabetesjournals.org/care
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S61
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

should be paid to the wide use of sulfony-
lureas because of the high risk of hypogly-
cemic events and fractures (84). Dipeptidyl
peptidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibitors and gluca-
gon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor ago-
nists have been used in clinical practice for
more than 15 years, and both clinical trials
and postmarketing data suggest a neutral
impact on bone health (85,86). Tirzepatide
may play a positive effect through glucose-
dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP)
receptor agonism, preventing bone loss as-
sociated with weight loss (87).
Use of sodium–glucose cotransporter 2
inhibitors has raised some concerns. The
Canagliﬂozin Cardiovascular Assessment
Study (CANVAS) study showed that sub-
jects treated with canagliﬂozin had a
signiﬁcant increase in fracture risk com-
pared with placebo (HR 1.55). Further
analyses from the same trial and from the
Canagliﬂozin and Renal Events in Diabetes
with Established Nephropathy Clinical Eval-
uation (CREDENCE) study found a neutral
effect on fracture risk (88–91). Although
few data are available, use of empagliﬂo-
zin, ertugliﬂozin, or dapagliﬂozin has not
been associated with negative effects on
bone health (90–92) Use of insulin has
been shown to double the risk of hip frac-
tures (84), likely because of higher risk of
hypoglycemia, longer duration of the dis-
ease, and comorbidities.
In conclusion, glucose-lowering medi-
cations with good bone safety proﬁles
should be preferred, especially in the el-
derly, in people with longer duration of
disease, or in people with complications.
Aggressive therapeutic approaches should
be avoided in the frail and in the elderly to
prevent hypoglycemic events and falls.
Cancer
Diabetes is associated with increased
risk of cancers of the liver, pancreas, en-
dometrium, colon/rectum, breast, and
bladder (93). The association may result
from shared risk factors between type 2
diabetes and cancer (older age, obesity,
and physical inactivity) but may also be
due to diabetes-related factors (94),
such as underlying disease physiology
or diabetes treatments, although evi-
dence for these links is scarce. People
with diabetes should be encouraged to
undergo recommended age- and sex-
appropriate cancer screenings, coordi-
nated with their primary health care pro-
fessional, and to reduce their modiﬁable
cancer risk factors (obesity, physical inac-
tivity, and smoking). New onset of atypi-
cal diabetes (lean body habitus and
negative family history) in a middle-aged
or older person may precede the diagno-
sis of pancreatic adenocarcinoma (95).
However, in the absence of other symp-
toms (e.g., weight loss and abdominal
pain), routine screening of all such individ-
uals is not currently recommended. Met-
formin
and
sulfonylureas
may
have
anticancer properties. Pioglitazone has
mixed data, with a previous concern for
bladder cancer association. Recommen-
dations cannot be made at this time
(96–98).
Cognitive Impairment/Dementia
Recommendation
4.15 In the presence of cognitive im-
pairment, diabetes treatment plans
should be simpliﬁed as much as pos-
sible and tailored to minimize the
risk of hypoglycemia. B
Diabetes is associated with a signiﬁcantly
increased risk and rate of cognitive de-
cline and an increased risk of dementia
(99,100). A meta-analysis of prospective
observational studies found that individ-
uals with diabetes had a 43% higher risk
of all types of dementia, a 43% higher
risk of Alzheimer dementia, and a 91%
higher risk of vascular dementia com-
pared with individuals without diabetes
(101). The reverse is also true: people
with Alzheimer dementia are more likely
to develop diabetes than people without
Alzheimer dementia. In a 15-year pro-
spective study of community-dwelling peo-
ple >60 years of age, the presence of
diabetes at baseline signiﬁcantly increased
the age- and sex-adjusted incidence of all-
cause dementia, Alzheimer dementia, and
vascular dementia compared with rates in
those with normal glucose tolerance (102).
See Section 13, “Older Adults,” for a more
detailed discussion regarding assessment
of cognitive impairment.
Diabetes and COVID-19
Recommendations
4.16 Health care professionals should
help people with diabetes aim to
achieve individualized glycemic goals
to reduce the risk of macrovascular
and microvascular risk as well as re-
duce the risk of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) and its complica-
tions. B
4.17 As we move into the recovery
phase, diabetes health care services
and practitioners should address the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in
higher-risk groups, including minor-
ity, socioeconomically deprived, and
older populations. B
4.18 People with diabetes who have
been infected with severe acute respi-
ratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-
CoV-2) should be followed up in the
longer term to assess complications
and symptoms of long COVID-19. E
4.19
New-onset
diabetes
cases
should receive routine clinic follow-
up to determine if the condition is
transient. B
4.20 There is no clear indication to
change prescribing of glucose-lowering
therapies in people with diabetes in-
fected by SARS-CoV-2. B
4.21 People with diabetes should be
prioritized and offered SARS-CoV-2
vaccines and vaccine boosters. B
Severe acute respiratory syndrome co-
ronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the virus that
causes the clinical disease COVID-19,
was ﬁrst reported in December 2019 in
China and has disproportionately im-
pacted certain groups, including men,
older people, racial and ethnic minority
populations, and people with certain
chronic conditions, including diabetes, car-
diovascular disease, kidney disease, and
certain respiratory diseases. COVID-19 is
now recognized as a complex multisystem
disease with sequelae including widespread
insulin resistance, endothelial dysfunction,
hematological disorders, and hyperimmune
responses (103). There is now evidence of
not only direct but also indirect adverse ef-
fects of COVID-19 in people with diabetes.
Many people with multiple long-term condi-
tions have diabetes, which has also been as-
sociated with worse outcomes in people
with COVID-19 (104). The association with
BMI and COVID-19 mortality is U-shaped in
both type 1 and type 2 diabetes (105).
COVID-19 has disproportionately af-
fected certain groups, such as older people
and those from some ethnic populations
who are known to have high prevalence of
chronic conditions such as diabetes, car-
diovascular disease, kidney disease, and
certain respiratory diseases (106). In peo-
ple with diabetes, higher blood glucose
S62
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

levels both prior to and during COVID-19
admission have been associated with
poor outcomes, including mortality (107).
Type 1 diabetes has been associated with
higher risk of COVID-19 mortality than
type 2 diabetes (108). The largest study
of people with diabetes to date, using
whole-population data from England with
over 3 million people, reported a higher
association for mortality in people with
type 1 diabetes than type 2 diabetes
(105). Male sex, older age, renal impair-
ment, non-Hispanic White race, socioeco-
nomic deprivation, and previous stroke
and heart failure were associated with in-
creased COVID-19–related mortality in
both type 1 and type 2 diabetes (105).
Much of the evidence for recommenda-
tions is from a recent systematic review
that was commissioned by the World
Health Organization on the latest research
evidence on the impact of COVID-19 on
people with diabetes (108).The review re-
ported that there are no appropriate data
to determine whether diabetes is a risk
factor for acquiring SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Diabetes is a risk factor for severe disease
and death from COVID-19.
Reasons
for
the
higher
rates
of
COVID-19 and severity in minority eth-
nic groups are complex and could be
due to higher prevalence of comorbid
conditions (e.g., diabetes), differences in
exposure risk (e.g., overcrowded living
conditions and essential worker jobs),
and access to treatment (e.g., health in-
surance status, specialist services, and
medications), which all relate to long-
standing structural inequities that vary
by ethnicity (109).
There is now overwhelming evidence
that approximately 30–40% of people
who are infected with COVID-19 get
persistent and sometimes relapsing and
remitting symptoms 4 weeks after infec-
tion, which has been termed postacute
sequelae of COVID-19, post-COVID-19
condition, postacute COVID-19 syndrome,
or long COVID (110,111). Currently, data
on long COVID speciﬁcally in people with
diabetes are lacking, and people who
have been infected with SARS-CoV-2
should be followed up in the longer term.
There have also been recent reports
of development of new-onset diabetes
in people who have had COVID-19. The
precise mechanisms for new-onset dia-
betes in people with COVID-19 are not
known but may include previously un-
diagnosed diabetes presenting early or
later in the disease trajectory, stress hyper-
glycemia, steroid-induced hyperglycemia,
and possibly direct or indirect effects of
SARS-CoV-2 on the b-cell (112). One large
U.S. retrospective study of over 27 million
people reported that COVID-19 was asso-
ciated with signiﬁcantly increased risk of
new-onset type 1 diabetes and a dispro-
portionately higher risk in ethnic minority
populations (113). Another cross-sectional
population-based
Canadian
study
ob-
served a slightly higher but nonsigniﬁcant
increase in diabetes incidence in children
during the pandemic, which may have re-
sulted from delays in diagnosis during the
pandemic with a catch-up effect (114).
There have been several publications on
the risk of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) dur-
ing the pandemic. A German diabetes
prospective study using registry data of
children and adolescents found an increase
in type 1 diabetes in the ﬁrst 3 months of
the ﬁrst wave, and the frequency of DKA at
presentation was signiﬁcantly higher than
those for 2019 (44.7% vs. 24.5%, adjusted
RR 1.84) and 2018 (vs. 24.1%, adjusted RR
1.85) as well as the proportion with severe
DKA (115). A larger study using national
data in England during the ﬁrst two waves
found that rates of DKA were higher than
those for preceding years across all pan-
demic periods studied (116). The study re-
ported lower DKA hospital admissions in
people with type 1 diabetes but higher
rates of DKA in people with type 1 diabetes
and those newly diagnosed with diabetes.
There is also evidence of adverse ef-
fects of COVID-19 on behavioral health
(117) and health-promoting lifestyles
during the pandemic. Some small stud-
ies in people with diabetes have re-
ported longer-term psychological impact
of SARS-CoV-2 infection, including fa-
tigue and risk of suicide (118). Longitu-
dinal follow-up of the Action for Health
in Diabetes (Look AHEAD) study of older
adults with type 2 diabetes reported a
1.6-fold higher prevalence for depressive
symptoms and 1.8-fold higher prevalence
for loneliness during the pandemic com-
pared with prepandemic levels (119). Fur-
thermore, many people with diabetes
remain fearful of face-to-face contact due
to the possible threat from mutant strains
of coronavirus (120). Negative emotions
due to the pandemic, including lock-
downs, have been associated with re-
duced motivation, physical inactivity, and
sedentary behavior (121). Higher levels
of pandemic-related distress have been
linked to higher A1C (122). Greater pan-
demic-related life disruptions have been
related to higher distress in parents of
youth with diabetes, which may have im-
pacted families from racial and ethnic mi-
nority groups to a greater degree than
non-Hispanic White families (123). On the
other hand, for some youth with type 1 di-
abetes, increased time at home during the
early phases of the COVID-19 pandemic
provided opportunities for enhanced fam-
ily support for diabetes self-management
and
reduced
diabetes-related
distress
(124).
As we recover from the pandemic, it is
essential that we prioritize the highest-risk
groups for their routine review and assess-
ment as well as management of their be-
havioral health and risk factors. Diabetes
professional bodies in some countries have
published guidance on risk stratiﬁcation
and who to prioritize for diabetes review
(125,126). Factors to consider for priori-
tization should include demographics,
socioeconomic status, education levels,
established complications, comorbid-
ities, and modiﬁable risk factors, which
are associated with high risk of progres-
sion of diabetes-related complications.
Several pharmacoepidemiologic stud-
ies have examined the association be-
tween glucose-lowering medications and
risk of COVID-19 and have reported con-
ﬂicting ﬁndings, although most studies
showed a lower risk of mortality with
metformin and a higher risk in people on
insulin. However, the absolute differences
in the risks have been small, and these
ﬁndings could be due to confounding by
indication (127). The gold standard for as-
sessing the effects of therapies is by ran-
domized controlled trial (RCT), and only
one RCT, the Dapagliﬂozin in Patients with
Cardiometabolic Risk Factors Hospitalized
with COVID-19 (DARE-19), a double-blind,
placebo-controlled RCT in people with and
without type 2 diabetes with at least one
cardiovascular risk factor, has been re-
ported (128). In this study, dapagliﬂozin
was well tolerated and resulted in fewer
events of organ dysfunction, but results
were not statistically signiﬁcant for the
dual primary outcome of prevention (time
to new or worsening organ dysfunction or
death) and the hierarchical composite out-
come of recovery by 30 days.
It is therefore important that people
with diabetes have regular SARS-CoV-2
vaccines (see IMMUNIZATIONS, above, for de-
tailed information on COVID-19 vaccines).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S63
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

It is unclear currently how often people
with diabetes will require booster vac-
cines. Although limited data are available
on COVID-19 vaccination attitudes or up-
take in people with diabetes in the U.S.
(129), diabetes health care professionals
may be in a position to address questions
and concerns among people with diabetes
and encourage vaccination.
Disability
Recommendation
4.22 An assessment of disability should
be performed at each visit for people
with diabetes. If a disability is impact-
ing functional ability or capacity to
manage their diabetes, a referral should
be made to an appropriate health care
professional specializing in disability
(e.g., physical medicine and rehabili-
tation specialist, physical therapist,
occupational therapist, speech-lan-
guage pathologist). E
A disability is deﬁned as a physical or
mental impairment that substantially lim-
its one or more major life activities of an
individual (130,131). Activities of daily liv-
ing (ADLs) and instrumental activities of
daily living (IADLs) comprise basic and
complex life care tasks, respectively. The
capacity to accomplish such tasks serves
as an important measure of function. Di-
abetes is associated with a strong in-
crease in the risk of physical disability,
with estimates of the association be-
tween diabetes and disability represent-
ing up to a 50–80% increased risk of
disability for people with diabetes com-
pared with people without diabetes (132).
Reviews have shown that lower-body
functional limitation was the most preva-
lent disability (47–84%) among people
with diabetes (133,134). In a systematic
review and meta-analysis, the presence of
diabetes increased the risk of mobility dis-
ability (15 studies; odds ratio [OR] 1.71
[95% CI 1.53–1.91]; RR 1.51 [95% CI
1.38–1.64], of IADL disability (10 studies;
OR 1.65 [95% CI 1.55–1.74]), and of ADL
disability (16 studies; OR 1.82 [95% CI
1.63–2.04]; RR 1.82 [95% CI 1.40–2.36])
(132). Diabetic peripheral neuropathy is a
common complication of both type 1 and
2 diabetes and may cause impaired pos-
tural balance and gait kinematics (135),
leading to functional disability. Further-
more, diabetic peripheral neuropathy may
progress to cause debilitating neuropathic
pain and nontraumatic lower-limb ampu-
tation, which has a devastating effect on
quality of life (136). In addition to compli-
cations of diabetes from microvascular
conditions such as diabetic kidney disease,
retinopathy, and peripheral neuropathy, it
is important to recognize the disabilities
caused by macrovascular complications of
diabetes. These macrovascular complica-
tions, which includecoronaryheartdisease,
stroke, and peripheral arterial disease, can
lead to further impairments (133).
An assessment of disability should be
performed at each visit and a referral
made to an appropriate health care profes-
sional specializing in disability (e.g., physi-
cal medicine and rehabilitation physician,
physical therapist, occupational therapist,
or speech-language pathologist). Custom-
ized rehabilitation interventions for individ-
uals with a disability from diabetes can
recover function, allowing for safe physical
activity (137), and improve quality of life
(138). Additionally, frailty is commonly as-
sociated with diabetes, with progression to
disability, morbidity, and mortality in older
adults. People with diabetes as well as
frailty or disability may contend with co-
morbid conditions such as hypoglycemia,
sarcopenia, falls, and cognitive dysfunc-
tion. A thorough medical evaluation is im-
perative to identify the best approaches to
preventative and therapeutic interventions
with respect to frailty and diabetes man-
agement (139).
Moreover, when treating people with
an acquired disability from diabetes, it is
vital to consider social determinants of
health, race/ethnicity, and socioeconomic
status (140). Rates of diabetes-related ma-
jor amputations have been found to be
higher in individuals who are from racial
and ethnic minority groups (141), live in
rural areas, and are from the lowest socio-
economic regions (142). Addressing the
complex challenges faced by individuals
with acquired disabilities from diabetes re-
quires a multifaceted approach involving
solutions from both within and outside
the health care system. By focusing on so-
cial determinants of health, health care
professionals can develop targeted inter-
ventions and establish support systems
that cater to the speciﬁc needs of this
population.
Hepatitis C
Infection with hepatitis C virus (HCV) is
associated with a higher prevalence of
type 2 diabetes, which is present in up
to one-third of individuals with chronic
HCV infection. HCV may impair glucose
metabolism by several mechanisms, in-
cluding directly via viral proteins and
indirectly by altering proinﬂammatory
cytokine levels (143). The use of newer
direct-acting antiviral drugs produces a
sustained virological response (cure) in
nearly all cases and has been reported
to improve glucose metabolism in individ-
uals with diabetes (144). A meta-analysis
of mostly observational studies found a
mean reduction in A1C levels of 0.45%
(95% CI 0.60 to 0.30) and reduced re-
quirement for glucose-lowering medica-
tion use following successful eradication
of HCV infection (145).
Hyperglycemia
In individuals with diabetes, higher A1C
level is associated with lower cognitive
function (43,146). A meta-analysis of
randomized trials found that tight glyce-
mic control, compared with higher A1C
goals, was associated with a slightly
lower rate of cognitive decline (147).
However, these ﬁndings were driven by
an older study with an A1C goal of
<7.0% in the tight-control arm. Analy-
ses within the ACCORD, Action in Diabe-
tes and Vascular Disease: Preterax and
Diamicron MR Controlled Evaluation
(ADVANCE), and Veterans Affairs Diabetes
Trial (VADT) studies found that tight glyce-
mic control (targeting A1C <6.0–6.5%)
resulted in no differences in cognitive out-
comes compared with standard control
(147–149). Therefore, intensive glycemic
control should not be advised for the im-
provement of cognitive function in individ-
uals with type 2 diabetes. Additionally,
people with type 2 diabetes and dementia
are at heightened risk for experiencing hy-
perglycemic crises (diabetic ketoacidosis
and hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state)
compared with people without dementia
(150), underscoring the importance of
supporting diabetes management for indi-
viduals experiencing cognitive decline and
diminished capacity for self-care.
Hypoglycemia
In type 2 diabetes, severe hypoglycemia is
associated with reduced cognitive func-
tion, and those with poor cognitive func-
tion have more severe hypoglycemia.
Multiple observational studies of adults
with diabetes have found an association
S64
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

between severe hypoglycemic episodes
and cognitive decline or incident dementia
(151–155). Decreased cognitive function
also increases the risk for severe hypogly-
cemia, likely through impaired ability to
recognize and respond appropriately to
hypoglycemic symptoms (152,156,157).
Tailoring glycemic therapy and/or liberaliz-
ing A1C goals may prevent hypoglycemia
in individuals with cognitive dysfunction.
See Section 13, “Older Adults,” for more
detailed discussion of hypoglycemia in
older people with type 1 and type 2
diabetes.
Low Testosterone in Men
Recommendation
4.23 In men with diabetes who have
symptoms or signs of hypogonadism,
such as decreased sexual desire (libido)
or activity or erectile dysfunction, con-
sider screening with a morning serum
testosterone level. B
Mean levels of testosterone are lower in
men with diabetes compared with age-
matched men without diabetes, but obe-
sity is a major confounder (158,159).
Testosterone replacement in men with
symptomatic hypogonadism may have ben-
eﬁts, including improved sexual function,
well-being, muscle mass and strength, and
bone density (160). In men with diabetes
who have symptoms or signs of low testos-
terone (hypogonadism), a morning total
testosterone level should be measured us-
ing an accurate and reliable assay (161). In
men who have total testosterone levels
close to the lower limit, it is reasonable to
determine free testosterone concentrations
either directly from equilibrium dialysis as-
says or by calculations that use total testos-
terone, sex hormone binding globulin, and
albumin concentrations (161). Please see
the Endocrine Society clinical practice
guideline for detailed recommendations
(161). Further tests (such as luteinizing
hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone
levels) may be needed to further evaluate
the individual. Testosterone replacement
in older men with hypogonadism has
been associated with increased coronary
artery plaque volume, with no conclusive
evidence that testosterone supplementa-
tion is associated with increased cardio-
vascular risk in hypogonadal men (161).
Erectile dysfunction is common in people
with diabetes and warrants evaluation
(162).
Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease and
Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis
Screening
Recommendations
4.24a Adults with type 2 diabetes
or prediabetes, particularly those with
obesity or cardiometabolic risk factors
or established cardiovascular disease,
should be screened/risk stratiﬁed for
clinically signiﬁcant liver ﬁbrosis (de-
ﬁned as moderate ﬁbrosis to cirrho-
sis) using a calculated ﬁbrosis-4 index
(FIB-4) (derived from age, ALT, AST,
and platelets [mdcalc.com/calc/2200/
ﬁbrosis4-ﬁb-4-index-liver-ﬁbrosis]), even
if they have normal liver enzymes. B
4.24b Adults with diabetes or predi-
abetes with persistently elevated
plasma aminotransferase levels for
>6 months and low FIB-4 should be
evaluated for other causes of liver
disease. B
4.25 Adults with type 2 diabetes or
prediabetes with an indeterminate
or high FIB-4 should have additional
risk stratiﬁcation by liver stiffness
measurement with transient elastog-
raphy or the blood biomarker en-
hanced liver ﬁbrosis (ELF). B
4.26 Adults with type 2 diabetes or
prediabetes with indeterminate results
or at high risk for signiﬁcant liver ﬁbro-
sis (i.e., by FIB-4, liver stiffness mea-
surement, or ELF) should be referred
to a gastroenterologist or hepatologist
for further workup. Interprofessional
care is recommended for long-term
management. B
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
includes a broad spectrum of disease,
ranging from macrovesicular hepatic stea-
tosis (with or without mild inﬂammation)
to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) to
cirrhosis. This is in the absence of ongoing
or recent consumption of signiﬁcant
amounts of alcohol (deﬁned as ingestion
of >21 standard drinks per week in men
and >14 standard drinks per week in
women over a 2-year period preceding
evaluation) or other secondary causes of
hepatic steatosis (163).
Diabetes is a major risk factor for de-
veloping NASH, disease progression, and
worse liver outcomes (164). Recent stud-
ies in adults in the U.S. estimated that
NAFLD is prevalent in >70% of people
with type 2 diabetes (165–167). This
is consistent with studies from other
countries (168). NASH is deﬁned histo-
logically as having $5% hepatic steatosis
and is associated with inﬂammation and
hepatocyte injury (hepatocyte balloon-
ing), with or without evidence of liver ﬁ-
brosis (163). Steatohepatitis is estimated
to affect more than half of people with
type 2 diabetes with NAFLD (169) and ap-
pears to be a driver for the development
of ﬁbrosis. Fibrosis stages are classiﬁed
histologically as the following: F0, no ﬁ-
brosis; F1, mild; F2, moderate (signiﬁ-
cant); F3, severe (advanced); and F4,
cirrhosis. In the U.S., between 12 and
20% of people with type 2 diabetes have
clinically signiﬁcant ﬁbrosis ($F2) (165,
166,169), with similar prevalence world-
wide (164,168). NASH is a leading cause
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (170,
171) and of liver transplantation in the
U.S., with transplant waiting lists being
overrepresented by people with type 2 di-
abetes (172). Clinicians underestimate its
prevalence and do not consistently imple-
ment appropriate screening strategies,
thus missing the diagnosis of the poten-
tially progressive form of NAFLD in high-
risk groups, such as those having obesity
or type 2 diabetes.This pattern of underdi-
agnosis is compounded by sparse referral
to specialists and inadequate prescription
of medications with proven efﬁcacy in
NASH (173,174).
Metabolic dysfunction–associated stea-
totic liver disease (MASLD) has been pro-
posed to replace the term nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease (NAFLD) to identify
steatotic liver disease in the presence of
at least one cardiometabolic risk factor
associated with insulin resistance (e.g.,
prediabetes, diabetes, atherogenic dysli-
pidemia, or hypertension) without other
identiﬁable causes of steatosis (175).
A separate category outside of MASLD,
named metabolic dysfunction and alco-
holic liver disease (MetALD), was created
for circumstances in which alcohol intake
is greater than that allowed for NAFLD
but less than that attributed to alcoholic
liver disease. The new deﬁnition of
NAFLD aims to remove potential stigma
from the term “fatty” when referring to
steatosis and to provide a positive diag-
nosis by means of having a cardiometa-
bolic risk factor as a surrogate for insulin
resistance, the metabolic dysfunction be-
lieved to be driving the development of
steatosis. While the deﬁnition may not
conﬂict with the past deﬁnition of NAFLD
for people with prediabetes or type 2
diabetesjournals.org/care
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S65
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

diabetes (who already have, by deﬁni-
tion, one cardiometabolic risk factor),
limitations include the need for better
validation, as cardiometabolic risk factors
may carry different weights and thus
some may also have lower speciﬁcity as
surrogates for insulin resistance (e.g., hy-
pertension). In addition, some people
may have insulin resistance and steatosis
without cardiometabolic risk factors, some-
thing more common in young adults in pri-
mary care clinics or even in some lean
people with steatohepatitis. Finally, some
people with type 2 diabetes or other
forms of diabetes may have steatosis
with predominantly insulin secretion deﬁ-
ciency, making diabetes a more question-
able surrogate for insulin resistance.
The goal of screening for NAFLD is to
identify people at risk for adverse health
outcomes associated with NASH, such as
cirrhosis, HCC, and death from liver dis-
ease. This risk is higher in people who
have central obesity and cardiometa-
bolic risk factors or insulin resistance, are
>50 years of age, and/or have persis-
tently elevated plasma aminotransferases
(AST and/or ALT >30 units/L for >6 months)
(176,177). Some genetic variants that alter
hepatocyte triglyceride metabolism may
also increase the risk of NASH progression
and cirrhosis (178,179), amplifying the im-
pact of obesity, but the role of genetic
testing in clinical practice remains to be
established.
Individuals with clinically signiﬁcant
ﬁbrosis ($F2), especially those with
type 2 diabetes, have a greater risk of
cirrhosis with liver decompensation, HCC,
liver transplantation, and all-cause mortal-
ity (180–183). Increased mortality associ-
ated with NAFLD is attributable not only
to cirrhosis and HCC but also to extrahe-
patic cancer (171), type 2 diabetes (184),
and cardiovascular disease (185,186). The
estimated relative impact depends on
length of follow-up and population stud-
ied, among other factors. Emerging evi-
dence suggests that NAFLD increases the
risk of chronic kidney disease, particularly
when liver ﬁbrosis is present (187,188),
although the association of NAFLD with
diabetic retinopathy is less clear (189).
Early diagnosis is essential to prevent fu-
ture cirrhosis and complications.
A recent meta-analysis reported a prev-
alence of NAFLD of 22% in people with
type 1 diabetes (190). This risk may be
linked to the fact that about one-third of
people with type 1 diabetes in the U.S.
have obesity (191). However, there is large
variability in NAFLD prevalence across
studies, and most measured liver fat by ul-
trasound. In one of the few studies using
the gold-standard MRI technique to quan-
tify liver fat, the prevalence of steatosis in
a population with type 1 diabetes with
low prevalence of obesity was only 8.8%
compared with 68% in people with type 2
diabetes (192). The prevalence of ﬁbrosis
was not established in that study. There-
fore, screening for ﬁbrosis in people with
type 1 diabetes should only be considered
in the presence of additional risk factors
for NAFLD, such as obesity, incidental he-
patic steatosis on imaging, or elevated
plasma aminotransferases.
There is consensus that the ﬁbrosis-4
index (FIB-4) is the most cost-effective
strategy for the initial screening of peo-
ple with prediabetes and cardiometa-
bolic risk factors or with type 2 diabetes
in primary care and diabetes clinical set-
tings (168,174,176,177,193–195). See the
proposed diagnostic algorithm by an ex-
pert group that included ADA representa-
tives in Fig. 4.2 (174). A screening strategy
based on elevated plasma aminotransfer-
ases >40 units/L would miss most individ-
uals with NASH in these settings, as clinically
signiﬁcant ﬁbrosis ($F2) is frequently ob-
served
with
plasma
aminotransferases
below the commonly used cutoff of
40 units/L (165–167,169,196,197). The
American College of Gastroenterology
considers the upper limit of normal ALT
levels to be 29–33 units/L for male individ-
uals and 19–25 units/L for female individu-
als (198), as higher levels are associated
with increased liver-related mortality, even
in the absence of identiﬁable risk factors.
The FIB-4 estimates the risk of hepatic cir-
rhosis and is calculated from the computa-
tion of age, plasma aminotransferases
(AST and ALT), and platelet count (mdcalc.
com/calc/2200/ﬁbrosis-4-ﬁb-4-index-liver-
ﬁbrosis). A value of <1.3 is considered low
risk of having advanced ﬁbrosis (F3–F4)
and for developing adverse liver outcomes,
while >2.67 is considered as having a high
probability of advanced ﬁbrosis (F3–F4)
and increased risk of adverse liver out-
comes. FIB-4 predicts changes over time in
hepatic ﬁbrosis (199,200) and allows risk
stratiﬁcation of individuals in terms of fu-
ture liver-related morbidity and mortality
(201). FIB-4 has reasonable speciﬁcity but
low sensitivity, hence a negative result
rules out ﬁbrosis while a positive result re-
quires conﬁrmatory testing (200,202–205).
It has a reasonable speciﬁcity and nega-
tive predictive value to rule out advanced
ﬁbrosis but lacks adequate sensitivity and
positive predictive value to establish pres-
ence of advanced ﬁbrosis in many cases,
which is the reason why people with dia-
betes often fall in the “indeterminate”
(or intermediate) risk group for advanced
ﬁbrosis and adverse liver outcomes
(when FIB-4 is between 1.3 and 2.67).
However, its low cost, simplicity, and
good speciﬁcity make it the initial test of
choice (Fig. 4.2). Performance is better in
a population with higher prevalence of
signiﬁcant ﬁbrosis (i.e., hepatology clin-
ics) compared with primary care settings.
FIB-4 has not been well validated in pedi-
atric populations and does not perform
as well in those aged <35 years. In peo-
ple with diabetes $65 years of age,
higher cutoffs for FIB-4 have been rec-
ommended (1.9–2.0 rather than >1.3)
(206,207).
In people with an indeterminate or
high FIB-4, additional risk stratiﬁcation is
required with a liver stiffness measure-
ment (LSM) by transient elastography
(Fig. 4.2) or, if unavailable, by commercial
blood ﬁbrosis biomarkers such as the en-
hanced liver ﬁbrosis (ELF) test (208) or
others. Use of a second nonproprietary
diagnostic panel is not recommended
(i.e., NAFLD ﬁbrosis score and others), as
they generally do not perform better
than FIB-4 (167,202). Transient elastogra-
phy (LSM) is the best-validated imaging
technique for ﬁbrosis risk stratiﬁcation,
and it predicts future cirrhosis and all-
cause mortality in NAFLD (176,177,209).
An LSM value of <8.0 kPa has a good
negative predictive value to exclude ad-
vanced ﬁbrosis ($F3–F4) (210–212) and
indicates low risk for clinically signiﬁcant
ﬁbrosis. Given the lack of widespread
availability of LSM, the ELF test is a good
alternative. Individuals with ELF <7.7 are
considered at low risk for adverse out-
comes. Such individuals with diabetes can
be followed in nonspecialty clinics with re-
peat surveillance testing every $2 years,
although the precise time interval remains
to be established. If the LSM is >12 kPa,
the risk for advanced ﬁbrosis is high and
people with diabetes should be referred to
the hepatologist (168). FIB-4 followed by
LSM helps stratify people with diabetes by
risk level and minimize specialty referrals
(204,209,213–215) (Fig. 4.2).
Specialists may order additional tests
for ﬁbrosis risk stratiﬁcation (175–177,
S66
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

195,209), with magnetic resonance elas-
tography (MRE) having the best overall
performance (particularly for early ﬁbro-
sis stages). However, the accessibility and
costs associated with MRE are barriers to
its use. While liver biopsy remains the
gold standard for the diagnosis of NASH,
its indication is reserved to the discretion
of the specialist within an interprofes-
sional team approach due to high costs
and potential for morbidity associated
with this procedure.
In 2020, an expert panel convened by
the American Gastroenterological Asso-
ciation that included representatives of
the ADA reviewed the published litera-
ture on the burden, screening, risk strat-
iﬁcation, diagnosis, and management of
individuals with NAFLD (175). See Fig.
4.2, which is adapted from this special
report (174). A Clinical Care Pathway
summarized the diagnosis and manage-
ment of NAFLD in a subsequent publica-
tion (177). Consensus has emerged to
start screening with FIB-4 followed by
LSM or ELF and patented biomarkers as
needed for the noninvasive ﬁbrosis risk
stratiﬁcation of individuals with NAFLD
in primary care and diabetes clinics
(167,174,176,177,193–195,216).
After initial risk stratiﬁcation (i.e., FIB-4,
LSM, and/or patented biomarkers), people
with diabetes at indeterminate or high risk
of ﬁbrosis should be referred, based on
practice setting, to a gastroenterologist or
hepatologist for further workup within the
framework of an interprofessional team
(163,176,177,216,217).
Management
Recommendations
4.27 Adults with type 2 diabetes or pre-
diabetes, particularly with overweight
or obesity, with nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD) should be recom-
mended lifestyle changes that promote
weight loss, ideally within a structured
nutrition plan and physical activity pro-
gram for cardiometabolic beneﬁts B
and histological improvement. C
4.28 For adults with type 2 diabetes,
particularly with overweight or obe-
sity, with NAFLD, consider using a
glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) re-
ceptor agonist with demonstrated
beneﬁts in nonalcoholic steatohepa-
titis (NASH) as an adjunctive therapy
to lifestyle interventions for weight
loss. B
4.29 Pioglitazone or GLP-1 receptor ag-
onists are the preferred agents for the
treatment of hyperglycemia in adults
with type 2 diabetes with biopsy-
proven NASH or those at high risk with
clinically signiﬁcant liver ﬁbrosis using
noninvasive tests. A
4.30a In adults with type 2 diabetes
and NAFLD, use of glucose-lowering
therapies other than pioglitazone or
GLP-1 receptor agonists may be
continued as clinically indicated, but
these therapies lack evidence of ben-
eﬁt in NASH. B
4.30b Insulin therapy is the pre-
ferred agent for the treatment of
hyperglycemia in adults with type 2
diabetes with decompensated cir-
rhosis. C
4.31a Adults with type 2 diabetes
and NAFLD are at increased cardio-
vascular risk; therefore, comprehen-
sive management of cardiovascular
risk factors is recommended. B
4.31b Statin therapy is safe in adults
with type 2 diabetes and compensated
cirrhosis from NAFLD and should be ini-
tiated or continued for cardiovascular
risk reduction as clinically indicated. B
Statin therapy should be used with
caution and close monitoring in people
with decompensated cirrhosis, given
limited safety and efﬁcacy data. B
4.32a Consider metabolic surgery in
appropriate candidates as an option
to treat NASH in adults with type 2
diabetes B and to improve cardio-
vascular outcomes. B
4.32b Metabolic surgery should be
used with caution in adults with
type 2 diabetes with compensated
cirrhosis from NAFLD B and is not
recommended in decompensated
cirrhosis. B
While steatohepatitis and cirrhosis occur
in lean people with diabetes and are be-
lieved to be linked to genetic predisposi-
tion, insulin resistance, and environmental
factors (218–220), there is ample evidence
to implicate excess visceral and overall adi-
posity in people with overweight and obe-
sity in the pathogenesis of the disease
(221,222). Obesity in the setting of type 2
diabetes worsens insulin resistance and
steatohepatitis, promoting the develop-
ment of cirrhosis (223). Therefore, clini-
cians should enact evidence-based inter-
ventions (as discussed in Section 5,
“Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and
Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes”)
to promote healthy lifestyle change and
weight loss for people with overweight or
obesity and NAFLD. A minimum weight
loss goal of 5%, preferably $10% (224,
225), is needed to improve liver histology,
with ﬁbrosis requiring the larger weight re-
duction to promote change (225–227). In-
dividualized, structured weight loss and
exercise programs offer greater beneﬁt
Figure 4.2—A proposed algorithm for risk stratiﬁcation in individuals with nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease or nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. ELF, enhanced liver ﬁbrosis; FIB-4, ﬁbrosis-4 index.
Adapted from Kanwal et al. (174).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S67
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

than standard counseling in people with
NAFLD (218,228).
Dietary recommendations to induce
an energy deﬁcit are not different from
those for people with diabetes with
obesity without NAFLD and should in-
clude a reduction of macronutrient con-
tent, limiting saturated fat, starch, and
added sugar, with adoption of healthier
eating patterns. The Mediterranean diet
has the best evidence for improving liver
and cardiometabolic health (176,193,194,
228–232). Both aerobic and resistance
training improve NAFLD in proportion to
treatment engagement and intensity of
the program (233–235).
Obesity pharmacotherapy may assist
with weight loss in the context of life-
style modiﬁcation if not achieved by life-
style modiﬁcation alone (see Section 8,
“Obesity and Weight Management for
the Prevention and Treatment of Type 2
Diabetes”).
At present, there are no FDA-approved
drugs for the treatment of NASH. There-
fore, treatment for people with type 2 di-
abetes and NASH is centered on the dual
purpose of treating hyperglycemia and
obesity, especially if clinically signiﬁcant
ﬁbrosis ($F2) is present. The rationale
for the treatment of people with type 2
diabetes is based on their high preva-
lence of NASH with signiﬁcant ﬁbrosis
(10–15% of people with type 2 diabetes)
(165–169), their higher risk of disease
progression and liver-related mortality
(164,183,236), and the lack of pharmaco-
logical treatments once cirrhosis is estab-
lished (237).Therefore, early diagnosis and
treatment of NAFLD offers the best oppor-
tunity for cirrhosis prevention. Pioglitazone
and some glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor
agonists (GLP-1 RAs) have been shown to
be effective to treat steatohepatitis (176,
177,238–240) and may slow ﬁbrosis pro-
gression (241–243) and decrease cardio-
vascular disease (177,239), which is the
number one cause of death in people with
type 2 diabetes and NAFLD (185).
Pioglitazone improves glucose and lipid
metabolism and reverses steatohepatitis
in people with prediabetes or type 2 dia-
betes (244,245) and even without diabe-
tes (246–248). Fibrosis also improved in
some trials (245,247). A meta-analysis
(241) concluded that pioglitazone treat-
ment results in resolution of NASH and
may improve ﬁbrosis. Pioglitazone may
halt the accelerated pace of ﬁbrosis pro-
gression observed in people with type 2
diabetes (242) and is overall cost-effective
for the treatment of NASH (249,250).Vita-
min E may be beneﬁcial for the treatment
of NASH in people without diabetes (246).
However, in people with type 2 diabetes,
vitamin E monotherapy was found to be
negative in a small RCT (242), and it did
not seem to enhance pioglitazone’s efﬁ-
cacy when used in combination as re-
ported in an earlier trial in this population
(245). Pioglitazone causes dose-dependent
weight gain (15 mg/day, mean of 1–2%;
45 mg/day, 3–5%), increases fracture risk,
may promote heart failure if used in indi-
viduals with preexisting congestive heart
failure, and may increase the risk of blad-
der cancer, although this remains contro-
versial (163,176,177,239,240).
GLP-1 RAs are effective at inducing
weight loss and ameliorating elevated
plasma aminotransferases and steatosis
(238). However, there are only two RCTs
of GLP-1 RAs in biopsy-proven individuals
with NASH. A small RCT reported that lira-
glutide improved some features of NASH
and, of particular relevance, delayed the
progression of ﬁbrosis (251). More re-
cently, once-daily subcutaneous semaglu-
tide in 320 people with biopsy-proven
NASH (62% having type 2 diabetes) re-
ported resolution of steatohepatitis in
59% at the higher dose (equivalent to
2.4
mg/week
semaglutide)
compared
with 17% in the placebo group (P < 0.001)
(243). Cumulatively, semaglutide did not
signiﬁcantly affect the stage of liver ﬁbro-
sis in this group of people (70% of whom
had F2 or F3 at baseline), but it signiﬁ-
cantly slowed over 72 weeks the progres-
sion of liver ﬁbrosis (4.9% with the GLP-1
RA at the highest dose compared with
18.8% on placebo). Tirzepatide (252),
sodium–glucose cotransporter inhibitors
(253–255), and insulin (240) reduce he-
patic steatosis, but their effects on steato-
hepatitis remain unknown. The use of
glucose-lowering agents other than piogli-
tazone or GLP-1 RAs may be continued
in individuals with type 2 diabetes and
NAFLD for glycemic control, as clinically
indicated. However, these agents have ei-
ther failed to improve steatohepatitis in
paired-biopsy studies (metformin) or have
no RCTs with liver histological end points
(i.e., sulfonylureas, glitinides, dipeptidyl
peptidase 4 inhibitors, or acarbose).
Insulin is the preferred glucose-lower-
ing agent for the treatment of hypergly-
cemia in adults with type 2 diabetes
with decompensated cirrhosis given the
lack of robust evidence about the safety
and efﬁcacy of oral agents and noninsulin
injectables (i.e., GLP-1 RAs and GLP-1/GIP
RAs) (256), although a recent 48-week
study suggested that GLP-1 RAs are safe
in individuals with NASH and compen-
sated cirrhosis (257).
Metabolic surgery improves NASH and
cardiometabolic health, altering the natural
history of the disease (258). Meta-analyses
report that 70–80% of people have im-
provement in hepatic steatosis, 50–75% in
inﬂammation and hepatocyte ballooning
(necrosis), and 30–40% in ﬁbrosis (259,
260). It may also reduce the risk of HCC
(260). Metabolic surgery should be used
with caution in individuals with compen-
sated cirrhosis (i.e., asymptomatic stage of
cirrhosis without associated liver complica-
tions), but with experienced surgeons the
risk of hepatic decompensation is similar to
that for individuals with less advanced liver
disease. Because of the paucity of safety
and outcome data, metabolic surgery is not
recommended in individuals with decom-
pensated cirrhosis (i.e., cirrhosis stage
with complications such as variceal
hemorrhage, ascites, hepatic encepha-
lopathy, or jaundice) who also have a
much higher risk of postoperative devel-
opment of these liver-related complica-
tions (163,176,177).
A number of studies now recognize
that adults with type 2 diabetes and
NAFLD are at an increased risk of car-
diovascular disease and require compre-
hensive management of cardiovascular
risk factors (163,176,177). Within an in-
terprofessional approach, statin therapy
should be initiated or continued for car-
diovascular risk reduction as clinically
indicated. Overall, its use appears to be
safe in adults with type 2 diabetes and
NASH, including in the presence of com-
pensated cirrhosis (Child-Pugh class A
or B cirrhosis) from NAFLD. Some stud-
ies even suggest that their use in people
with chronic liver disease may reduce ep-
isodes of hepatic decompensation and/or
overall mortality (261,262). Statin therapy
is not recommended in decompensated
cirrhosis given limited safety and efﬁcacy
data (163,176,177).
Obstructive Sleep Apnea
Age-adjusted rates of obstructive sleep ap-
nea, a risk factor for cardiovascular dis-
ease, are signiﬁcantly higher (4- to 10-fold)
with obesity, especially with central obesity
S68
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

(263) (see Section 5, “Facilitating Positive
Health
Behaviors
and
Well-being
to
Improve Health Outcomes”). The preva-
lence of obstructive sleep apnea in the
population with type 2 diabetes may be
as high as 23%, and the prevalence of
any sleep-disordered breathing may be
as high as 58% (264,265). In participants
with obesity enrolled in the Look AHEAD
trial, the prevalence exceeded 80% (266).
Individuals with symptoms suggestive of
obstructive sleep apnea (e.g., excessive
daytime sleepiness, snoring, and wit-
nessed apnea) should be considered for
screening (267). Sleep apnea treatment
(lifestyle modiﬁcation, continuous posi-
tive airway pressure, oral appliances, and
surgery) signiﬁcantly improves quality of
life and blood pressure management.
The evidence for a treatment effect on
glycemic control is mixed (268).
Pancreatitis
Diabetes is linked to diseases of the
exocrine pancreas, such as pancreatitis,
which may disrupt the global architecture
or physiology of the pancreas, often result-
ing in both exocrineand endocrinedysfunc-
tion. Up to half of individuals with diabetes
may have some degree of impaired exo-
crine pancreas function (269). People with
diabetes are at an approximately twofold
higher risk of developing acute pancreatitis
(270).
Conversely, prediabetes and/or diabe-
tes has been found to develop in approxi-
mately one-third of individuals after an
episode of acute pancreatitis (271); thus,
the relationship is likely bidirectional.
Postpancreatitis diabetes may include
either new-onset disease or previously
unrecognized diabetes (272). Studies of
individuals treated with incretin-based
therapies for diabetes have also reported
that pancreatitis may occur more fre-
quently with these medications, but re-
sults have been mixed and causality has
not been established (273–275).
Islet autotransplantation should be
considered for individuals requiring total
pancreatectomy for medically refractory
chronic pancreatitis to prevent postsur-
gical diabetes. Approximately one-third
of individuals undergoing total pancrea-
tectomy with islet autotransplantation
are insulin free 1 year postoperatively,
and observational studies from different
centers have demonstrated islet graft
function up to a decade after the surgery
in some individuals (276–280). Both per-
son with diabetes and disease factors
should be carefully considered when de-
ciding the indications and timing of this
surgery. Surgeries should be performed in
skilled facilities that have demonstrated
expertise in islet autotransplantation.
Periodontal Disease
Periodontal disease is more severe, and
may be more prevalent, in people with
diabetes than in those without and has
been associated with higher A1C levels
(281–283). Longitudinal studies suggest
that people with periodontal disease
have higher rates of incident diabetes.
Current evidence suggests that peri-
odontal disease adversely affects diabe-
tes outcomes, although evidence for
treatment beneﬁts remains controver-
sial (284,285). In an RCT, intensive peri-
odontal treatment was associated with
better glycemic outcomes (A1C 8.3% vs.
7.8% in control subjects and the inten-
sive-treatment group, respectively) and
reduction in inﬂammatory markers after
12 months of follow-up (286).
Sensory Impairment
Hearing impairment, both in high-
frequency and low- to midfrequency
ranges, is more common in people with
diabetes than in those without, with stron-
gerassociations found in studies of younger
people (287). Proposed pathophysiologic
mechanisms include the combined contri-
butions of hyperglycemia and oxidative
stress to cochlear microangiopathy and
auditory neuropathy (288). In a National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES) analysis, hearing impairment
was about twice as prevalent in people
with diabetes than in those without, after
adjusting for age and other risk factors for
hearing impairment (289). Low HDL choles-
terol, coronary heart disease, peripheral
neuropathy, and general poor health have
been reported as risk factors for hearing
impairment for people with diabetes, but
an association of hearing loss with blood
glucose levels has not been consistently
observed (290). In the Diabetes Control
and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of
Diabetes Interventions and Complications
(DCCT/EDIC) cohort, increases in the time-
weighted mean A1C was associated with
increased risk of hearing impairment
when tested after long-term (>20 years)
follow-up, with every 10% increase in A1C
leading to 19% high-frequency impair-
ment (291). Impairment in smell, but not
taste, has also been reported in individuals
with diabetes (292).
Statins
Systematic reviews of observational studies
and randomized trials have found no ad-
verse effects of statins on cognition (293).
The FDA postmarketing surveillance data-
bases have also revealed a low reporting
rate for cognitive function–related adverse
events, including cognitive dysfunction or
dementia, with statin therapy, similar to
rates seen with other commonly pre-
scribed cardiovascular medications (293).
Therefore, fear of cognitive decline should
not be a barrier to statin use in people with
diabetes when indicated.
References
1. Stellefson M, Dipnarine K, Stopka C. The
chronic care model and diabetes management in
US primary care settings: a systematic review.
Prev Chronic Dis 2013;10:E26
2. Coleman K, Austin BT, Brach C, Wagner EH.
Evidence on the Chronic Care Model in the new
millennium. Health Aff (Millwood) 2009;28:75–85
3. Gabbay RA, Bailit MH, Mauger DT, Wagner
EH, Siminerio L. Multipayer patient-centered
medical home implementation guided by the
chronic care model. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf
2011;37:265–273
4. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group.
Intensive blood-glucose control with sulphonylureas
or insulin compared with conventional treatment
and risk of complications in patients with type 2
diabetes (UKPDS 33). Lancet 1998;352:837–853
5. Nathan DM, Genuth S, Lachin J, et al.; Diabetes
Control and Complications Trial Research Group.
The effect of intensive treatment of diabetes on
the development and progression of long-term
complications in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
N Engl J Med 1993;329:977–986
6. Lachin JM, Genuth S, Nathan DM, Zinman B;
DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Effect of glycemic
exposure on the risk of microvascular complications
in the diabetes control and complications trial—
revisited. Diabetes 2008;57:995–1001
7. White NH, Cleary PA, Dahms W, Goldstein D,
Malone J; Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
(DCCT)/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions
and
Complications
(EDIC)
Research
Group.
Beneﬁcial effects of intensive therapy of diabetes
during adolescence: outcomes after the conclusion
of the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
(DCCT). J Pediatr 2001;139:804–812
8. Rodriguez K, Ryan D, Dickinson JK, Phan V.
Improving quality outcomes: the value of
diabetes care and education specialists. Clin
Diabetes 2022;40:356–365
9. Anderson RM, Funnell MM. Compliance and
adherence are dysfunctional concepts in diabetes
care. Diabetes Educ 2000;26:597–604
10. Sarkar U, Fisher L, Schillinger D. Is self-efﬁcacy
associated with diabetes self-management across
race/ethnicity and health literacy? Diabetes Care
2006;29:823–829
diabetesjournals.org/care
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S69
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

11. King DK, Glasgow RE, Toobert DJ, et al. Self-
efﬁcacy, problem solving, and social-environmental
support are associated with diabetes self-
management behaviors. Diabetes Care 2010;33:
751–753
12. Nouwen A, Urquhart Law G, Hussain S,
McGovern S, Napier H. Comparison of the role
of self-efﬁcacy and illness representations in
relation to dietary self-care and diabetes distress
in adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Psychol
Health 2009;24:1071–1084
13. Dickinson JK, Guzman SJ, Maryniuk MD,
et al. The use of language in diabetes care and
education. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1790–1799
14. Wodi AP, Murthy N, McNally V, Cineas S, Ault
K. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
recommended immunization schedule for children
and adolescents aged 18 years or younger—
United States, 2023. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep 2023;72:137–140
15. Murthy N, Wodi AP, McNally V, Cineas S,
Ault K. Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices recommended immunization schedule
for adults aged 19 years or older—United States,
2023. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2023;72:
141–144
16. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practice
(ACIP). ACIP Evidence to Recommendation User’s
Guide. 2020. Accessed 1 September 2023.
Available from https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/
acip/recs/grade/downloads/acip-evidence-rec-
frame-user-guide.pdf
17. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Interim clinical considerations for use of COVID-
19 vaccines, 2023. Accessed 28 July 2023.
Available from https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/
covid-19/clinical-considerations/covid-19-vaccines
-us.html
18. Weng MK, Doshani M, Khan MA, et al.
Universal hepatitis B vaccination in adults aged
19-59 years: updated recommendations of the
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices—
United States, 2022. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep 2022;71:477–483
19. Goeijenbier M, van Sloten TT, Slobbe L, et al.
Beneﬁts of ﬂu vaccination for persons with diabetes
mellitus: a review.Vaccine 2017;35:5095–5101
20. Yedlapati SH, Khan SU, Talluri S, et al. Effects
of inﬂuenza vaccine on mortality and cardio-
vascular outcomes in patients with cardiovascular
disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J
Am Heart Assoc 2021;10:e019636
21. Rondy M, El Omeiri N, Thompson MG,
Lev^eque A, Moren A, Sullivan SG. Effectiveness of
inﬂuenza vaccines in preventing severe inﬂuenza
illness among adults: a systematic review and
meta-analysis
of
test-negative
design
case-
control studies. J Infect 2017;75:381–394
22. Kornum JB, Thomsen RW, Riis A, Lervang
HH, Schønheyder HC, Sørensen HT. Diabetes,
glycemic control, and risk of hospitalization with
pneumonia: a population-based case-control
study. Diabetes Care 2008;31:1541–1545
23. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC); Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices. Updated recommendations for pre-
vention
of
invasive
pneumococcal
disease
among adults using the 23-valent pneumococcal
polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23). MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep 2010;59:1102–1106
24. Falkenhorst G, Remschmidt C, Harder T,
Hummers-Pradier E, Wichmann O, Bogdan C.
Effectiveness of the 23-valent pneumococcal
polysaccharide vaccine (PPV23) against pneu-
mococcal disease in the elderly: systematic
review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 2017;12:
e0169368
25. Kobayashi M, Farrar JL, Gierke R, et al. Use
of 15-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine
and 20-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine
among U.S. adults: updated recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices—United States, 2022. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep 2022;71:109–117
26. Ahmed SS, Pondo T, Xing W, et al. Early
impact of 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate
vaccine use on invasive pneumococcal disease
among adults with and without underlying medical
conditions—United States. Clin Infect Dis 2020;
70:2484–2492
27. Hamid S, Winn A, Parikh R, et al. Seasonality
of respiratory syncytial virus—United States,
2017-2023. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2023;
72:355–361
28. McLaughlin JM, Khan F, Begier E, Swerdlow
DL, Jodar L, Falsey AR. Rates of medically
attended RSV among US adults: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Open Forum Infect Dis
2022;9:ofac300
29. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
CDC recommends RSV vaccine for older adults.
2023. Accessed 19 August 2023. Available from
https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2023/s0629
-rsv.html
30. Grant RW, Ashburner JM, Hong CS, Chang Y,
Barry MJ, Atlas SJ. Deﬁning patient complexity
from the primary care physician’s perspective: a
cohort study. Ann Intern Med 2011;155:797–804
31. Tinetti ME, Fried TR, Boyd CM. Designing health
care for the most common chronic condition—
multimorbidity. JAMA 2012;307:2493–2494
32. Sudore RL, Karter AJ, Huang ES, et al.
Symptom burden of adults with type 2 diabetes
across the disease course: Diabetes & Aging
Study. J Gen Intern Med 2012;27:1674–1681
33. Nederstigt C, Uitbeijerse BS, Janssen LGM,
Corssmit EPM, de Koning EJP, Dekkers OM.
Associated auto-immune disease in type 1 diabetes
patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Eur J Endocrinol 2019;180:135–144
34. De Block CE, De Leeuw IH, Van Gaal LF. High
prevalence of manifestations of gastric auto-
immunity in parietal cell antibody-positive type 1
(insulin-dependent) diabetic patients. The Belgian
Diabetes Registry. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999;
84:4062–4067
35. Triolo TM, Armstrong TK, McFann K, et al.
Additional autoimmune disease found in 33% of
patients at type 1 diabetes onset. Diabetes Care
2011;34:1211–1213
36. Hughes JW, Riddlesworth TD, DiMeglio LA,
Miller KM, Rickels MR; T1D Exchange Clinic
Network. Autoimmune diseases in children and
adults with type 1 diabetes from the T1D Exchange
Clinic Registry. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:
4931–4937
37. Kahaly GJ, Hansen MP. Type 1 diabetes
associated autoimmunity. Autoimmun Rev 2016;15:
644–648
38. Eisenbarth GS, Gottlieb PA. Autoimmune
polyendocrine syndromes. N Engl J Med 2004;
350:2068–2079
39. Rubio-Tapia A, Hill ID, Kelly CP, Calderwood
AH; American College of Gastroenterology. ACG
clinical guidelines: diagnosis and management
of celiac disease. Am J Gastroenterol 2013;108:
656–676
40. Husby S, Murray JA, Katzka DA. AGA clinical
practice update on diagnosis and monitoring of
celiac disease-changing utility of serology and
histologic
measures:
expert
review.
Gastro-
enterology 2019;156:885–889
41. Cauley JA, Hochberg MC, Lui LY, et al. Long-
term risk of incident vertebral fractures. JAMA
2007;298:2761–2767
42. Kanis JA, Johnell O, De Laet C, et al. A meta-
analysis of previous fracture and subsequent
fracture risk. Bone 2004;35:375–382
43. Pedersen AB, Ehrenstein V, Szepligeti SK, et al.
Thirty-ﬁve-year trends in ﬁrst-time hospitalization
for hip fracture, 1-year mortality, and the prognostic
impact of comorbidity: a Danish nationwide cohort
study, 1980-2014. Epidemiology 2017;28:898–905
44. Tajeu GS, Delzell E, Smith W, et al. Death,
debility, and destitution following hip fracture. J
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2014;69:346–353
45. Miao J, Brismar K, Nyren O, Ugarph-
Morawski A, Ye W. Elevated hip fracture risk in
type 1 diabetic patients: a population-based
cohort study in Sweden. Diabetes Care 2005;28:
2850–2855
46. Wang H, Ba Y, Xing Q, Du JL. Diabetes
mellitus and the risk of fractures at speciﬁc sites:
a meta-analysis. BMJ Open 2019;9:e024067
47. Weber DR, Haynes K, Leonard MB, Willi SM,
Denburg MR. Type 1 diabetes is associated with
an increased risk of fracture across the life span:
a population-based cohort study using The Health
Improvement Network (THIN). Diabetes Care
2015;38:1913–1920
48. Janghorbani M, Van Dam RM, Willett WC,
Hu FB. Systematic review of type 1 and type 2
diabetes mellitus and risk of fracture. Am J
Epidemiol 2007;166:495–505
49. Napoli N, Conte C, Pedone C, et al. Effect of
insulin resistance on BMD and fracture risk in
older adults. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2019;104:
3303–3310
50. Napoli N, Schwartz AV, Schafer AL, et al.;
Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOS) Study
Research Group.Vertebral fracture risk in diabetic
elderly men: the MrOS Study. J Bone Miner Res
2018;33:63–69
51. Schwartz AV, Vittinghoff E, Bauer DC, et al.;
Study of Osteoporotic Fractures (SOF) Research
Group; Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOS)
Research
Group;
Health,
Aging,
and
Body
Composition
(Health
ABC) Research
Group.
Association of BMD and FRAX score with risk of
fracture in older adults with type 2 diabetes.
JAMA 2011;305:2184–2192
52. Hidayat K, Fang QL, Shi BM, Qin LQ.
Inﬂuence of glycemic control and hypoglycemia
on the risk of fracture in patients with diabetes
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of observational studies. Osteoporos Int 2021;32:
1693–1704
53. Wang B, Wang Z, Poundarik AA, et al.
Unmasking fracture risk in type 2 diabetes: the
association of longitudinal glycemic hemoglobin
level and medications. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2022;107:e1390–e1401
54. Komorita Y, Iwase M, Fujii H, et al. Both
hypo- and hyperglycaemia are associated with
S70
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

increased fracture risk in Japanese people with
type 2 diabetes: the Fukuoka Diabetes Registry.
Diabet Med 2020;37:838–847
55. Majumdar SR, Leslie WD, Lix LM, et al.
Longer duration of diabetes strongly impacts
fracture risk assessment: the Manitoba BMD
cohort. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:4489–
4496
56. Vavanikunnel J, Charlier S, Becker C, et al.
Association between glycemic control and risk of
fracture in diabetic patients: a nested case-
control study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2019;104:
1645–1654
57. Leanza G, Maddaloni E, Pitocco D, et al. Risk
factors for fragility fractures in type 1 diabetes.
Bone 2019;125:194–199
58. Strotmeyer ES, Cauley JA, Schwartz AV, et al.
Nontraumatic fracture risk with diabetes mellitus
and impaired fasting glucose in older white and
black adults: the health, aging, and body
composition study. Arch Intern Med 2005;165:
1612–1617
59. Schwartz AV, Vittinghoff E, Sellmeyer DE,
et al.; Health, Aging, and Body Composition
Study. Diabetes-related complications, glycemic
control, and falls in older adults. Diabetes Care
2008;31:391–396
60. Loke YK, Singh S, Furberg CD. Long-term use
of thiazolidinediones and fractures in type 2
diabetes: a meta-analysis. CMAJ 2009;180:32–39
61. Dormandy J, Bhattacharya M; PROactive
Investigators. Safety and tolerability of pioglitazone
in high-risk patients with type 2 diabetes: an
overview of data from PROactive. Drug Saf 2009;
32:187–202
62. Schwartz AV, Chen H, Ambrosius WT, et al.
Effects of TZD use and discontinuation on
fracture rates in ACCORD Bone Study. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2015;100:4059–4066
63. Hidayat K, Du X, Wu MJ, Shi BM. The use
of metformin, insulin, sulphonylureas, and
thiazolidinediones and the risk of fracture:
systematic review and meta-analysis of obser-
vational studies. Obes Rev 2019;20:1494–1503
64. Ferrari SL, Abrahamsen B, Napoli N, et al.;
Bone and Diabetes Working Group of IOF.
Diagnosis and management of bone fragility in
diabetes: an emerging challenge. Osteoporos Int
2018;29:2585–2596
65. Napoli N, Conte C, Eastell R, et al. Bone
turnover markers do not predict fracture risk in
type 2 diabetes. J Bone Miner Res 2020;35:
2363–2371
66. International
Society
for
Pediatric
and
Adolescent Diabetes. ISPAD Clinical Practice
Consensus Guidelines 2022. Accessed 18 October
2023. Available from https://www.ispad.org/
page/ISPADGuidelines2022
67. Armamento-Villareal R, Aguirre L, Napoli N,
et al. Changes in thigh muscle volume predict
bone mineral
density
response to
lifestyle
therapy in frail, obese older adults. Osteoporos
Int 2014;25:551–558
68. Sinclair AJ, Abdelhaﬁz A, Dunning T, et al.
An international position statement on the
management of frailty in diabetes mellitus:
summary of recommendations 2017. J Frailty
Aging 2018;7:10–20
69. Ebeling PR, Adler RA, Jones G, et al.
Management of endocrine disease: therapeutics
of vitamin D. Eur J Endocrinol 2018;179:R239–
R259
70. Maddaloni E, Cavallari I, Napoli N, Conte C.
Vitamin D and diabetes mellitus. Front Horm Res
2018;50:161–176
71. Iolascon G, Gimigliano R, Bianco M, et al. Are
dietary supplements and nutraceuticals effective
for
musculoskeletal
health
and
cognitive
function? A scoping review. J Nutr Health Aging
2017;21:527–538
72. National Institutes of Health. Calcium—fact
sheet for health professionals. Accessed 18
October 2023. Available from https://ods.od.nih
.gov/factsheets/Calcium-HealthProfessional
73. Rosen CJ, Abrams SA, Aloia JF, et al. IOM
committee members
respond to
Endocrine
Society vitamin D guideline. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2012;97:1146–1152
74. National Institutes of Health. Vitamin D—
fact sheet for health professionals. Accessed 13
October 2023. Available from https://ods.od.nih
.gov/factsheets/VitaminD-HealthProfessional
75. Holick MF, Binkley NC, Bischoff-Ferrari HA,
et al.; Endocrine Society. Evaluation, treatment,
and prevention of vitamin D deﬁciency: an
Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2011;96:1911–1930
76. Eastell R, Vittinghoff E, Lui LY, et al. Diabetes
mellitus and the beneﬁt of antiresorptive therapy
on fracture risk. J Bone Miner Res 2022;37:
2121–2131
77. Langdahl BL, Silverman S, Fujiwara S, et al.
Real-world
effectiveness
of
teriparatide
on
fracture reduction in patients with osteoporosis
and comorbidities or risk factors for fractures:
integrated analysis of 4 prospective obser-
vational studies. Bone 2018;116:58–66
78. Schwartz
AV,
Pavo
I,
Alam
J,
et
al.
Teriparatide in patients with osteoporosis and
type 2 diabetes. Bone 2016;91:152–158
79. Conley RB,
Adib
G, Adler
RA,
et al.
Secondary fracture prevention: consensus clinical
recommendations from a multistakeholder coalition.
J Bone Miner Res 2020;35:36–52
80. Hofbauer LC, Rachner TD. More DATA to
guide sequential osteoporosis therapy. Lancet
2015;386:1116–1118
81. Ferrari
S, Eastell
R,
Napoli
N,
et
al.
Denosumab in postmenopausal women with
osteoporosis and diabetes: subgroup analysis of
FREEDOM and FREEDOM extension. Bone 2020;
134:115268
82. Langdahl
BL,
Hofbauer
LC,
Forfar
JC.
Cardiovascular safety and sclerostin inhibition. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2021;106:1845–1853
83. Cosman F, Crittenden DB, Adachi JD, et al.
Romosozumab treatment in postmenopausal
women with osteoporosis. N Engl J Med 2016;
375:1532–1543
84. Napoli N, Strotmeyer ES, Ensrud KE, et al.
Fracture risk in diabetic elderly men: the MrOS
study. Diabetologia 2014;57:2057–2065
85. Hidayat K, Du X, Shi BM. Risk of fracture with
dipeptidyl
peptidase-4
inhibitors,
glucagon-like
peptide-1 receptor agonists, or sodium-glucose
cotransporter-2 inhibitors in real-world use:
systematic review and meta-analysis of obser-
vational studies. Osteoporos Int 2019;30:1923–
1940
86. Chai S, Liu F, Yang Z, et al. Risk of fracture
with dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors, glucagon-
like peptide-1 receptor agonists, or sodium-
glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors in patients
with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic
review and network meta-analysis combining
177 randomized controlled trials with a median
follow-up of 26 weeks. Front Pharmacol 2022;
13:825417
87. Rosenstock J, Wysham C, Frıas JP, et al.
Efﬁcacy and safety of a novel dual GIP and GLP-1
receptor agonist tirzepatide in patients with type 2
diabetes (SURPASS-1): a double-blind, randomised,
phase 3 trial. Lancet 2021;398:143–155
88. Bilezikian JP, Watts NB, Usiskin K, et al.
Evaluation of bone mineral density and bone
biomarkers in patients with type 2 diabetes
treated with canagliﬂozin. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2016;101:44–51
89. Watts NB, Bilezikian JP, Usiskin K, et al.
Effects of canagliﬂozin on fracture risk in patients
with type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2016;101:157–166
90. Perkovic V, Jardine MJ, Neal B, et al.; CREDENCE
Trial Investigators. Canagliﬂozin and renal outcomes
in type 2 diabetes and nephropathy. N Engl J Med
2019;380:2295–2306
91. Neal
B,
Perkovic
V,
Matthews
DR.
Canagliﬂozin and cardiovascular and renal events
in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;377:2099
92. Li X, Li T, Cheng Y, et al. Effects of SGLT2
inhibitors on fractures and bone mineral density
in type 2 diabetes: an updated meta-analysis.
Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2019;35:e3170
93. Suh S, Kim KW. Diabetes and cancer: cancer
should be screened in routine diabetes assessment.
Diabetes Metab J 2019;43:733–743
94. Giovannucci E, Harlan DM, Archer MC, et al.
Diabetes and cancer: a consensus report. CA
Cancer J Clin 2010;60:207–221
95. Aggarwal G, Kamada P, Chari ST. Prevalence
of diabetes mellitus in pancreatic cancer compared
to common cancers. Pancreas 2013;42:198–201
96. Ninomiya I, Yamazaki K, Oyama K, et al.
Pioglitazone inhibits the proliferation and metastasis
of human pancreatic cancer cells. Oncol Lett
2014;8:2709–2714
97. Hendriks AM, Schrijnders D, Kleefstra N,
et al. Sulfonylurea derivatives and cancer, friend
or foe? Eur J Pharmacol 2019;861:172598
98. Hua Y, Zheng Y, Yao Y, Jia R, Ge S, Zhuang A.
Metformin and cancer hallmarks: shedding new
lights on therapeutic repurposing. J Transl Med
2023;21:403
99. Cukierman T, Gerstein HC, Williamson JD.
Cognitive decline and dementia in diabetes—
systematic overview of prospective observational
studies. Diabetologia 2005;48:2460–2469
100. Biessels GJ, Staekenborg S, Brunner E,
Brayne C, Scheltens P. Risk of dementia in
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review. Lancet
Neurol 2006;5:64–74
101. Xue M, Xu W, Ou YN, et al. Diabetes
mellitus and risks of cognitive impairment and
dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of 144 prospective studies. Ageing Res Rev
2019;55:100944
102. Ohara T, Doi Y, Ninomiya T, et al. Glucose
tolerance status and risk of dementia in the
community: the Hisayama study. Neurology 2011;
77:1126–1134
103. Roberts CM, Levi M, McKee M, Schilling R,
Lim WS, Grocott MPW. COVID-19: a complex
multisystem disorder. Br J Anaesth 2020;125:
238–242
104. Chudasama YV, Zaccardi F, Gillies CL, et al.
Patterns of multimorbidity and risk of severe
diabetesjournals.org/care
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S71
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

SARS-CoV-2 infection: an observational study in
the U.K. BMC Infect Dis 2021;21:908
105. Holman N, Knighton P, Kar P, et al. Risk
factors for COVID-19-related mortality in people
with type 1 and type 2 diabetes in England: a
population-based cohort study. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol 2020;8:823–833
106. Martin CA, Jenkins DR, Minhas JS, et al.;
Leicester COVID-19 Consortium. Socio-demographic
heterogeneity in the prevalence of COVID-19
during lockdown is associated with ethnicity and
household size: results from an observational
cohort study. EClinicalMedicine 2020;25:100466
107. Hartmann-Boyce J, Morris E, Goyder C, et al.
Diabetes and COVID-19: risks, management, and
learnings from other national disasters. Diabetes
Care 2020;43:1695–1703
108. Hartmann-Boyce J, Rees K, Perring JC, et al.
Risks of and from SARS-CoV-2 infection and
COVID-19 in people with diabetes: a systematic
review of reviews. Diabetes Care 2021;44:
2790–2811
109. Khunti K, Feldman EL, Laiteerapong N,
Parker W, Routen A, Peek M. The impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic on ethnic minority groups
with diabetes. Diabetes Care 2023;46:228–236
110. Chen C, Haupert SR, Zimmermann L, Shi X,
Fritsche LG, Mukherjee B. Global prevalence
of post-coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
condition or long COVID: a meta-analysis and
systematic review. J Infect Dis 2022;226:1593–
1607
111. Nalbandian A, Sehgal K, Gupta A, et al.
Post-acute COVID-19 syndrome. Nat Med 2021;
27:601–615
112. Khunti K, Del Prato S, Mathieu C, Kahn SE,
Gabbay RA, Buse JB. COVID-19, hyperglycemia,
and new-onset diabetes. Diabetes Care 2021;44:
2645–2655
113. Qeadan F, Tingey B, Egbert J, et al. The
associations between COVID-19 diagnosis, type 1
diabetes, and the risk of diabetic ketoacidosis: a
nationwide cohort from the US using the Cerner
Real-World Data. PLoS One 2022;17:e0266809
114. Shulman R, Cohen E, Stukel TA, Diong C,
Guttmann A. Examination of trends in diabetes
incidence among children during the COVID-19
pandemic in Ontario, Canada, from March 2020
to September 2021. JAMA Netw Open 2022;5:
e2223394
115. Kamrath C, M€onkem€oller K, Biester T, et al.
Ketoacidosis in children and adolescents with
newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes during the
COVID-19 pandemic in Germany. JAMA 2020;
324:801–804
116. Misra S, Barron E, Vamos E, et al. Temporal
trends in emergency admissions for diabetic
ketoacidosis in people with diabetes in England
before and during the COVID-19 pandemic:
a population-based study. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol 2021;9:671–680
117. Violant-Holz
V,
Gallego-Jimenez
MG,
Gonzalez-Gonzalez CS, et al. Psychological health
and physical activity levels during the COVID-19
pandemic: a systematic review. Int J Environ Res
Public Health 2020;17:9419
118. Alessi J, Scherer GDLG, Erthal IN, et al. One
in ten patients with diabetes have suicidal
thoughts after 1 year of the COVID-19 pandemic:
we need to talk about diabetes and mental
health
not
only
during
Suicide
Prevention
Awareness Month. Acta Diabetol 2022;59:143–
145
119. Chao AM, Wadden TA, Clark JM, et al.
Changes in the prevalence of symptoms of
depression, loneliness, and insomnia in U.S. older
adults with type 2 diabetes during the COVID-19
pandemic: the Look AHEAD study. Diabetes Care
2022;45:74–82
120. Caballero AE, Ceriello A, Misra A, et al.
COVID-19 in people living with diabetes: an
international consensus. J Diabetes Complications
2020;34:107671
121. Stockwell S, Trott M, Tully M, et al. Changes
in physical activity and sedentary behaviours
from before to during the COVID-19 pandemic
lockdown: a systematic review. BMJ Open Sport
Exerc Med 2021;7:e000960
122. O’Donnell MB, Hilliard ME, Cao VT, et al. “It
just kind of feels like a different world now:”
stress and resilience for adolescents with type 1
diabetes in the era of COVID-19. Front Clin
Diabetes Healthc 2022;3:835739
123. Wang CH, Hilliard ME, Carreon SA, et al.
Predictors of mood, diabetes-speciﬁc and COVID-
19-speciﬁc experiences among parents of early
school-age children with type 1 diabetes during
initial months of the COVID-19 pandemic. Pediatr
Diabetes 2021;22:1071–1080
124. Ferguson K, Moore H, Kaidbey JH, et al.
Impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on pediatric
type 1 diabetes management: a qualitative study.
Sci Diabetes Self Manag Care 2022;48:522–532
125. Diggle J, Brown P. How to undertake a
remote diabetes review. Diabetes & Primary Care
2020;22:43–45
126. Nagi D, Wilmot E, Owen K, et al. ABCD
position statement on risk stratiﬁcation of adult
patients with diabetes during COVID-19 pandemic.
Br J Diabetes 2021;21:123–131
127. Khunti K, Knighton P, Zaccardi F, et al.
Prescription of glucose-lowering therapies and
risk of COVID-19 mortality in people with type 2
diabetes: a nationwide observational study in
England. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2021;9:293–
303
128. Kosiborod MN, Esterline R, Furtado RHM,
et al. Dapagliﬂozin in patients with cardiometabolic
risk factors hospitalised with COVID-19 (DARE-19):
a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
phase 3 trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2021;
9:586–594
129. Czeisler ME, Barrett CE, Siegel KR, et al.
Health care access and use among adults with
diabetes during the COVID-19 pandemic—United
States, February-March 2021. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 2021;70:1597–1602
130. United States Code. Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990. Pub. L. No. 101–336
42 U.S.C. § 2. 104 Stat. 328
131. United
States
Code.
Americans
with
Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008. Pub. L.
No. 110–325 42 U.S.C.A. § 12101 et seq.
132. Wong E, Backholer K, Gearon E, et al.
Diabetes and risk of physical disability in adults: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol 2013;1:106–114
133. Tomic D, Shaw JE, Magliano DJ.The burden
and risks of emerging complications of diabetes
mellitus. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2022;18:525–539
134. Lisy K, Campbell JM, Tufanaru C, Moola S,
Lockwood C. The prevalence of disability among
people with cancer, cardiovascular disease, chronic
respiratory disease and/or diabetes: a systematic
review. Int J Evid-Based Healthc 2018;16:154–166
135. Khan KS, Andersen H. The impact of
diabetic neuropathy on activities of daily living,
postural balance and risk of falls—a systematic
review. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2022;16:289–294
136. Selvarajah D, Kar D, Khunti K, et al. Diabetic
peripheral neuropathy: advances in diagnosis and
strategies for screening and early intervention.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2019;7:938–948
137. Streckmann F, Balke M, Cavaletti G, et al.
Exercise and neuropathy: systematic review with
meta-analysis. Sports Med 2022;52:1043–1065
138. Jing X, Chen J, Dong Y, et al. Related factors
of quality of life of type 2 diabetes patients:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Health
Qual Life Outcomes 2018;16:189
139. Yoon SJ, Kim KI. Frailty and disability in
diabetes. Ann Geriatr Med Res 2019;23:165–169
140. Hill-Briggs F, Adler NE, Berkowitz SA, et al.
Social determinants of health and diabetes: a
scientiﬁc review. Diabetes Care 2020;44:258–279
141. Tan TW, Shih CD, Concha-Moore KC, et al.
Correction: disparities in outcomes of patients
admitted with diabetic foot infections. PLoS One
2019;14:e0215532
142. Skrepnek GH, Mills JL Sr, Armstrong DG. A
diabetic
emergency
one
million
feet
long:
disparities and burdens of illness among diabetic
foot ulcer cases within emergency departments
in the United States, 2006-2010. PLoS One
2015;10:e0134914
143. Lecube A, Hernandez C, Genesca J, Simo R.
Proinﬂammatory cytokines, insulin resistance,
and insulin secretion in chronic hepatitis C patients:
a case-control study. Diabetes Care 2006;29:
1096–1101
144. Hum
J,
Jou
JH,
Green
PK,
et
al.
Improvement in glycemic control of type 2
diabetes after successful treatment of hepatitis C
virus. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1173–1180
145. Carnovale C, Pozzi M, Dassano A, et al. The
impact of a successful treatment of hepatitis
C virus on glyco-metabolic control in diabetic
patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Acta Diabetol 2019;56:341–354
146. Gudala K, Bansal D, Schifano F, Bhansali A.
Diabetes mellitus and risk of dementia: a meta-
analysis of prospective observational studies. J
Diabetes Investig 2013;4:640–650
147. Tang X, Cardoso MA, Yang J, Zhou JB, Simo
R. Impact of intensive glucose control on brain
health: meta-analysis of cumulative data from
16,584 patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes Ther 2021;12:765–779
148. Cukierman-Yaffe T, Gerstein HC, Williamson
JD, et al.; Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in
Diabetes-Memory in Diabetes (ACCORD-MIND)
Investigators. Relationship between baseline
glycemic control and cognitive function in
individuals with type 2 diabetes and other
cardiovascular risk factors: the action to control
cardiovascular risk in diabetes-memory in diabetes
(ACCORD-MIND) trial. Diabetes Care 2009;32:
221–226
149. Launer LJ, Miller ME, Williamson JD, et al.;
ACCORD MIND Investigators. Effects of intensive
glucose lowering on brain structure and function
in people with type 2 diabetes (ACCORD MIND):
a randomised open-label substudy. Lancet Neurol
2011;10:969–977
S72
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

150. McCoy RG, Galindo RJ, Swarna KS, et al.
Sociodemographic, clinical, and treatment-
related factors associated with hyperglycemic
crises among adults with type 1 or type 2
diabetes in the US from 2014 to 2020. JAMA
Netw Open 2021;4:e2123471
151. Whitmer RA, Karter AJ,Yaffe K, Quesenberry
CP Jr, Selby JV. Hypoglycemic episodes and risk of
dementia in older patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus. JAMA 2009;301:1565–1572
152. Punthakee Z, Miller ME, Launer LJ, et al.;
ACCORD Group of Investigators; ACCORD-MIND
Investigators. Poor cognitive function and risk of
severe hypoglycemia in type 2 diabetes: post hoc
epidemiologic analysis of the ACCORD trial.
Diabetes Care 2012;35:787–793
153. Lacy ME, Gilsanz P, Eng C, Beeri MS, Karter
AJ, Whitmer RA. Severe hypoglycemia and
cognitive function in older adults with type 1
diabetes: the Study of Longevity in Diabetes
(SOLID). Diabetes Care 2020;43:541–548
154. Lee AK, Rawlings AM, Lee CJ, et al. Severe
hypoglycaemia, mild cognitive impairment,
dementia and brain volumes in older adults with
type 2 diabetes: the Atherosclerosis Risk in
Communities (ARIC) cohort study. Diabetologia
2018;61:1956–1965
155. Haroon NN, Austin PC, Shah BR, Wu J, Gill
SS, Booth GL. Risk of dementia in seniors with
newly diagnosed diabetes: a population-based
study. Diabetes Care 2015;38:1868–1875
156. Mattishent K, Loke YK. Bi-directional inter-
action between hypoglycaemia and cognitive
impairment in elderly patients treated with
glucose-lowering agents: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab 2016;
18:135–141
157. Giorda CB, Ozzello A, Gentile S, et al.;
HYPOS-1 Study Group of AMD. Incidence and risk
factors for severe and symptomatic hypoglycemia
in type 1 diabetes. Results of the HYPOS-1 study.
Acta Diabetol 2015;52:845–853
158. Dhindsa S, Miller MG, McWhirter CL, et al.
Testosterone concentrations in diabetic and
nondiabetic obese men. Diabetes Care 2010;33:
1186–1192
159. Grossmann M. Low testosterone in men
with type 2 diabetes: signiﬁcance and treatment.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2011;96:2341–2353
160. Bhasin S, Cunningham GR, Hayes FJ, et al.;
Task Force, Endocrine Society. Testosterone therapy
in men with androgen deﬁciency syndromes: an
Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2010;95:2536–2559
161. Bhasin S, Brito JP, Cunningham GR, et al.
Testosterone therapy in men with hypogonadism:
an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2018;103:1715–1744
162. Shindel AW, Lue TF. Medical and surgical
therapy of erectile dysfunction. In Endotext.
Feingold KR, Anawalt B, Blackman MR, et al., Eds.
South
Dartmouth,
MA,
MDText.com,
2000.
Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25905163
163. Rinella
ME,
Neuschwander-Tetri
BA,
Siddiqui MS, et al. AASLD practice guidance on
the clinical assessment and management of
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology 2023;
77:1797–1835
164. Younossi ZM, Golabi P, de Avila L, et al. The
global epidemiology of NAFLD and NASH in
patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Hepatol 2019;71:
793–801
165. Lomonaco R, Godinez Leiva E, Bril F, et al.
Advanced liver ﬁbrosis is common in patients
with type 2 diabetes followed in the outpatient
setting: the need for systematic screening.
Diabetes Care 2021;44:399–406
166. Ciardullo S, Monti T, Perseghin G. High
prevalence of advanced liver ﬁbrosis assessed by
transient elastography among U.S. adults with
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2021;44:519–525
167. Barb D, Repetto EM, Stokes ME, Shankar
SS, Cusi K. Type 2 diabetes mellitus increases the
risk of hepatic ﬁbrosis in individuals with obesity
and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Obesity
(Silver Spring) 2021;29:1950–1960
168. Stefan N, Cusi K. A global view of the
interplay between non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
and diabetes. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2022;
10:284–296
169. Harrison SA, Gawrieh S, Roberts K, et al.
Prospective evaluation of the prevalence of non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease and steatohepatitis in
a large middle-aged US cohort. J Hepatol 2021;
75:284–291
170. Paik JM, Golabi P, Younossi Y, Mishra A,
Younossi ZM. Changes in the global burden of
chronic liver diseases from 2012 to 2017: the
growing impact of NAFLD. Hepatology 2020;
72:1605–1616
171. Simon TG, Roelstraete B, Khalili H, Hagstr€om
H, Ludvigsson JF. Mortality in biopsy-conﬁrmed
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: results from a
nationwide cohort. Gut 2021;70:1375–1382
172. Burra P, Becchetti C, Germani G. NAFLD
and liver transplantation: disease burden, current
management and future challenges. JHEP Rep
2020;2:100192
173. Younossi ZM, Ong JP, Takahashi H, et al.;
Global Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Council. A
global survey of physicians knowledge about
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Clin Gastro-
enterol Hepatol 2022;20:e1456–e1468
174. Kanwal F, Shubrook JH, Younossi Z, et al.
Preparing for the NASH epidemic: a call to action.
Diabetes Care 2021;44:2162–2172
175. Rinella ME, Lazarus JV, Ratziu V, et al.; NAFLD
Nomenclature consensus group. A multisociety
Delphi consensus statement on new fatty liver
disease nomenclature. Hepatology. 24 June 2023
[Epub ahead of print]. DOI: 10.1097/HEP.0000
000000000520
176. Cusi K, Isaacs S, Barb D, et al. American
Association of Clinical Endocrinology clinical practice
guideline for the diagnosis and management of
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in primary care and
endocrinology clinical settings: co-sponsored by the
American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases
(AASLD). Endocr Pract 2022;28:528–562
177. Kanwal F, Shubrook JH, Adams LA, et al.
Clinical Care Pathway for the risk stratiﬁcation
and management of patients with nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology 2021;161:
1657–1669
178. Gellert-Kristensen H, Richardson TG, Davey
Smith G, Nordestgaard BG, Tybjaerg-Hansen A,
Stender S. Combined effect of PNPLA3, TM6SF2,
and HSD17B13 variants on risk of cirrhosis and
hepatocellular
carcinoma
in
the
general
population. Hepatology 2020;72:845–856
179. Stender S, Kozlitina J, Nordestgaard BG,
Tybjærg-Hansen
A,
Hobbs
HH,
Cohen
JC.
Adiposity ampliﬁes the genetic risk of fatty liver
disease conferred by multiple loci. Nat Genet
2017;49:842–847
180. Angulo P, Kleiner DE, Dam-Larsen S, et al.
Liver ﬁbrosis, but no other histologic features, is
associated with long-term outcomes of patients
with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Gastro-
enterology 2015;149:389–397.e10
181. Ekstedt M, Hagstr€om H, Nasr P, et al.
Fibrosis stage is the strongest predictor for
disease-speciﬁc mortality in NAFLD after up to 33
years of follow-up. Hepatology 2015;61:1547–
1554
182. Taylor RS, Taylor RJ, Bayliss S, et al.
Association between ﬁbrosis stage and outcomes
of patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Gastro-
enterology 2020;158:1611–1625.e12
183. Sanyal AJ, Van Natta ML, Clark J, et al.;
NASH Clinical Research Network (CRN). Pros-
pective study of outcomes in adults with non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease. N Engl J Med
2021;385:1559–1569
184. Mantovani A, Byrne CD, Bonora E, Targher
G. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and risk of
incident type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. Dia-
betes Care 2018;41:372–382
185. Duell PB, Welty FK, Miller M, et al.;
American Heart Association Council on Arterio-
sclerosis, Thrombosis and Vascular Biology; Council
on
Hypertension;
Council
on
the
Kidney
in
Cardiovascular Disease; Council on Lifestyle and
Cardiometabolic Health; and Council on Peripheral
Vascular Disease. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
and cardiovascular risk: a scientiﬁc statement from
the American Heart Association. Arterioscler
Thromb Vasc Biol 2022;42:e168–e185
186. Mantovani A, Csermely A, Petracca G, et al.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and risk of fatal
and non-fatal cardiovascular events: an updated
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021;6:903–913
187. Ciardullo S, Ballabeni C,Trevisan R, Perseghin
G. Liver stiffness, albuminuria and chronic kidney
disease in patients with NAFLD: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Biomolecules 2022;12:105
188. Musso G, Gambino R, Tabibian JH, et al.
Association of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
with chronic kidney disease: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. PLoS Med 2014;11:e1001680
189. Song D, Li C, Wang Z, Zhao Y, Shen B, Zhao
W. Association of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
with diabetic retinopathy in type 2 diabetic
patients: a meta-analysis of observational studies.
J Diabetes Investig 2021;12:1471–1479
190. de Vries M, Westerink J, Kaasjager KHAH,
de Valk HW. Prevalence of nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD) in patients with type 1 diabetes
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2020;105:3842–3853
191. Corbin KD, Driscoll KA, Pratley RE, Smith
SR, Maahs DM; Advancing Care for Type 1
Diabetes and Obesity Network (ACT1ON). Obesity
in type 1 diabetes: pathophysiology, clinical
impact, and mechanisms. Endocr Rev 2018;39:
629–663
192. Cusi K, Sanyal AJ, Zhang S, et al. Non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) prevalence
and its metabolic associations in patients with
type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes. Diabetes
Obes Metab 2017;19:1630–1634
diabetesjournals.org/care
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S73
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

193. Arab JP, Dirchwolf M, Alvares-da-Silva MR,
et al. Latin American Association for the Study
of the Liver (ALEH) practice guidance for the
diagnosis and treatment of non-alcoholic fatty
liver disease. Ann Hepatol 2020;19:674–690
194. Eslam M, Sarin SK, Wong VW, et al. The
Asian Paciﬁc Association for the Study of the
Liver clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis
and management of metabolic associated fatty
liver disease. Hepatol Int 2020;14:889–919
195. European Association for the Study of the
Liver; Clinical Practice Guideline Panel. EASL
Clinical Practice Guidelines on non-invasive tests
for evaluation of liver disease severity and
prognosis—2021 update. J Hepatol 2021;75:
659–689
196. Portillo-Sanchez P, Bril F, Maximos M, et al.
High prevalence of nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
and normal plasma aminotransferase levels. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2015;100:2231–2238
197. Maximos M, Bril F, Portillo Sanchez P, et al.
The role of liver fat and insulin resistance as
determinants of plasma aminotransferase eleva-
tion in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology
2015;61:153–160
198. Kwo PY, Cohen SM, Lim JK. ACG clinical
guideline: evaluation of abnormal liver chemistries.
Am J Gastroenterol 2017;112:18–35
199. Younossi ZM, Anstee QM, Wai-Sun Wong V,
et al. The association of histologic and non-
invasive tests with adverse clinical and patient-
reported outcomes in patients with advanced
ﬁbrosis due to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis.
Gastroenterology 2021;160:1608–1619.e13
200. Siddiqui MS, Yamada G, Vuppalanchi R,
et al. Diagnostic accuracy of noninvasive ﬁbrosis
models to detect change in ﬁbrosis stage. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2019;17:1877–1885.e5
201. Unalp-Arida A, Ruhl CE. Liver ﬁbrosis scores
predict liver disease mortality in the United
States population. Hepatology 2017;66:84–95
202. Qadri S, Ahlholm N, Lønsmann I, et al.
Obesity modiﬁes the performance of ﬁbrosis
biomarkers in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2022;107:e2008–e2020
203. Bril F, McPhaul MJ, Caulﬁeld MP, et al.
Performance of plasma biomarkers and diagno-
stic panels for nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and
advanced ﬁbrosis in patients with type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2020;43:290–297
204. Anstee QM, Lawitz EJ, Alkhouri N, et al.
Noninvasive tests accurately identify advanced
ﬁbrosis due to NASH: baseline data from the
STELLAR trials. Hepatology 2019;70:1521–1530
205. Singh A, Gosai F, Siddiqui MT, et al.
Accuracy of noninvasive ﬁbrosis scores to detect
advanced ﬁbrosis in patients with type-2 diabetes
with biopsy-proven nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
J Clin Gastroenterol 2020;54:891–897
206. McPherson S, Hardy T, Dufour JF, et al. Age
as a confounding factor for the accurate non-
invasive diagnosis of advanced NAFLD ﬁbrosis.
Am J Gastroenterol 2017;112:740–751
207. Ishiba H, Sumida Y, Tanaka S, et al.; Japan
Study Group of Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease
(JSG-NAFLD). The novel cutoff points for the FIB4
index categorized by age increase the diagnostic
accuracy in NAFLD: a multi-center study. J
Gastroenterol 2018;53:1216–1224
208. Vali Y, Lee J, Boursier J, et al.; LITMUS
Systematic Review Team. Enhanced liver ﬁbrosis
test for the non-invasive diagnosis of ﬁbrosis in
patients with NAFLD: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. J Hepatol 2020;73:252–262
209. Castera L, Friedrich-Rust M, Loomba R.
Noninvasive assessment of liver disease in
patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
Gastroenterology 2019;156:1264–1281.e4
210. Eddowes PJ, Sasso M, Allison M, et al.
Accuracy of FibroScan controlled attenuation
parameter and liver stiffness measurement in
assessing steatosis and ﬁbrosis in patients with
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology
2019;156:1717–1730
211. Mozes FE, Lee JA, Selvaraj EA, et al.;
LITMUS Investigators. Diagnostic accuracy of
non-invasive tests for advanced ﬁbrosis in patients
with NAFLD: an individual patient data meta-
analysis. Gut 2022;71:1006–1019
212. Elhence A, Anand A, Biswas S, et al.
Compensated advanced chronic liver disease in
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: two-step strategy
is better than Baveno criteria. Dig Dis Sci 2023;
68:1016–1025
213. Lee J, Vali Y, Boursier J, et al. Prognostic
accuracy of FIB-4, NAFLD ﬁbrosis score and APRI
for NAFLD-related events: a systematic review.
Liver Int 2021;41:261–270
214. Chan WK, Treeprasertsuk S, Goh GB, et al.
Optimizing use of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
ﬁbrosis score, ﬁbrosis-4 score, and liver stiffness
measurement to identify patients with advanced
ﬁbrosis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2019;17:
2570–2580.e37
215. Petta S,Wai-Sun Wong V, Bugianesi E, et al.
Impact of obesity and alanine aminotransferase
levels on the diagnostic accuracy for advanced
liver ﬁbrosis of noninvasive tools in patients with
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Am J Gastro-
enterol 2019;114:916–928
216. Wong VWS, Zelber-Sagi S, Cusi K, et al.
Management of NAFLD in primary care settings.
Liver Int 2022;42:2377–2389
217. Lazarus JV, Anstee QM, Hagstr€om H, et al.
Deﬁning comprehensive models of care for
NAFLD. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021;18:
717–729
218. Long MT, Noureddin M, Lim JK. AGA clinical
practice update: diagnosis and management
of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in lean indi-
viduals: expert review. Gastroenterology 2022;
163:764–774.e1
219. Cusi K. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis in
nonobese patients: not so different after all.
Hepatology 2017;65:4–7
220. Younes R, Bugianesi E. NASH in lean
individuals. Semin Liver Dis 2019;39:86–95
221. Loomba R, Friedman SL, Shulman GI.
Mechanisms and disease consequences of
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Cell 2021;184:
2537–2564
222. Cusi K. Role of obesity and lipotoxicity in
the development of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis:
pathophysiology and clinical implications. Gastro-
enterology 2012;142:711–725.e6
223. Schuppan D, Surabattula R, Wang XY.
Determinants of ﬁbrosis progression and
regression in NASH. J Hepatol 2018;68:238–250
224. Akbulut UE, Isik IA, Atalay A, et al. The
effect of a Mediterranean diet vs. a low-fat diet
on non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in children: a
randomized trial. Int J Food Sci Nutr 2022;73:
357–366
225. Koutoukidis DA, Koshiaris C, Henry JA, et al.
The effect of the magnitude of weight loss on
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Metabolism 2021;115:
154455
226. Promrat K, Kleiner DE, Niemeier HM, et al.
Randomized controlled trial testing the effects of
weight loss on nonalcoholic steatohepatitis.
Hepatology 2010;51:121–129
227. Vilar-Gomez E, Martinez-Perez Y, Calzadilla-
Bertot L, et al. Weight loss through lifestyle
modiﬁcation signiﬁcantly reduces features of
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Gastroenterology
2015;149:367–378.e5
228. Gepner Y, Shelef I, Komy O, et al. The
beneﬁcial effects of Mediterranean diet over
low-fat diet may be mediated by decreasing
hepatic fat content. J Hepatol 2019;71:379–388
229. Garvey WT, Mechanick JI, Brett EM, et al.;
Reviewers of the AACE/ACE Obesity Clinical
Practice Guidelines. American Association of
Clinical Endocrinologists and American College of
Endocrinology comprehensive clinical practice
guidelines for medical care of patients with
obesity. Endocr Pract 2016;22(Suppl. 3):1–203
230. Kawaguchi T, Charlton M, Kawaguchi A,
et al. Effects of Mediterranean diet in patients
with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a systematic
review, meta-analysis, and meta-regression analysis
of randomized controlled trials. Semin Liver Dis
2021;41:225–234
231. Younossi ZM, Corey KE, Lim JK. AGA clinical
practice update on lifestyle modiﬁcation using
diet and exercise to achieve weight loss in the
management of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease:
expert review. Gastroenterology 2021;160:912–918
232. Plauth M, Bernal W, Dasarathy S, et al.
ESPEN guideline on clinical nutrition in liver
disease. Clin Nutr 2019;38:485–521
233. Orci LA, Gariani K, Oldani G, Delaune V,
Morel P, Toso C. Exercise-based interventions for
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a meta-analysis
and meta-regression. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
2016;14:1398–1411
234. Hashida R, Kawaguchi T, Bekki M, et al.
Aerobic vs. resistance exercise in non-alcoholic
fatty liver disease: a systematic review. J Hepatol
2017;66:142–152
235. Sargeant JA, Gray LJ, Bodicoat DH, et al.
The effect of exercise training on intrahepatic
triglyceride and hepatic insulin sensitivity: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes Rev
2018;19:1446–1459
236. Kanwal F, Kramer JR, Li L, et al. Effect of
metabolic traits on the risk of cirrhosis and
hepatocellular cancer in nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease. Hepatology 2020;71:808–819
237. Younossi Z, Stepanova M, Sanyal AJ, et al.
The conundrum of cryptogenic cirrhosis: adverse
outcomes without treatment options. J Hepatol
2018;69:1365–1370
238. Patel Chavez C, Cusi K, Kadiyala S. The
emerging role of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor
agonists for the management of NAFLD. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2022;107:29–38
239. Gastaldelli A, Cusi K. From NASH to diabetes
and from diabetes to NASH: mechanisms and
treatment options. JHEP Rep 2019;1:312–328
240. Budd J, Cusi K. Role of agents for the
treatment of diabetes in the management of
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Curr Diab Rep
2020;20:59
S74
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

241. Musso G, Cassader M, Paschetta E, Gambino
R. Thiazolidinediones and advanced liver ﬁbrosis
in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: a meta-analysis.
JAMA Intern Med 2017;177:633–640
242. Bril F, Kalavalapalli S, Clark VC, et al.
Response to pioglitazone in patients with non-
alcoholic steatohepatitis with vs without type 2
diabetes. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2018;16:
558–566.e2
243. Newsome PN, Buchholtz K, Cusi K, et al.;
NN9931-4296 Investigators. A placebo-controlled
trial of subcutaneous semaglutide in nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med 2021;384:1113–
1124
244. Belfort R, Harrison SA, Brown K, et al. A
placebo-controlled trial of pioglitazone in subjects
with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med
2006;355:2297–2307
245. Cusi K, Orsak B, Bril F, et al. Long-term
pioglitazone treatment for patients with non-
alcoholic steatohepatitis and prediabetes or type
2 diabetes mellitus: a randomized trial. Ann
Intern Med 2016;165:305–315
246. Sanyal AJ, Chalasani N, Kowdley KV, et al.;
NASH CRN. Pioglitazone, vitamin E, or placebo for
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med
2010;362:1675–1685
247. Aithal GP, Thomas JA, Kaye PV, et al.
Randomized, placebo-controlled trial of pio-
glitazone in nondiabetic subjects with non-
alcoholic steatohepatitis. Gastroenterology 2008;
135:1176–1184
248. Huang JF, Dai CY, Huang CF, et al. First-
in-Asian double-blind randomized trial to assess
the efﬁcacy and safety of insulin sensitizer in
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis patients. Hepatol Int
2021;15:1136–1147
249. Noureddin M, Jones C, Alkhouri N, Gomez
EV, Dieterich DT, Rinella ME. Screening for
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in persons with
type 2 diabetes in the United States is cost-
effective: a comprehensive cost-utility analysis.
Gastroenterology 2020;159:1985–1987.e4
250. Mahady SE, Wong G, Craig JC, George J.
Pioglitazone and vitamin E for nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis: a cost utility analysis. Hepatology
2012;56:2172–2179
251. Armstrong MJ, Gaunt P, Aithal GP, et al.;
LEAN Trial Team. Liraglutide safety and efﬁcacy
in patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
(LEAN): a multicentre, double-blind, randomised,
placebo-controlled phase 2 study. Lancet 2016;
387:679–690
252. Gastaldelli A, Cusi K, Fernandez Lando L,
Bray R, Brouwers B, Rodrıguez A. Effect of
tirzepatide versus insulin degludec on liver fat
content and abdominal adipose tissue in
people with type 2 diabetes (SURPASS-3 MRI):
a substudy of the randomised, open-label,
parallel-group, phase 3 SURPASS-3 trial. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol 2022;10:393–406
253. Cusi K, Bril F, Barb D, et al. Effect of
canagliﬂozin treatment on hepatic triglyceride
content and glucose metabolism in patients with
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Obes Metab 2019;21:
812–821
254. Kahl S, Gancheva S, Straßburger K, et al.
Empagliﬂozin effectively lowers liver fat content
in well-controlled type 2 diabetes: a randomized,
double-blind, phase 4, placebo-controlled trial.
Diabetes Care 2020;43:298–305
255. Latva-Rasku A, Honka MJ, Kullberg J, et al.
The SGLT2 inhibitor dapagliﬂozin reduces liver fat
but does not affect tissue insulin sensitivity: a
randomized,
double-blind,
placebo-controlled
study with 8-week treatment in type 2 diabetes
patients. Diabetes Care 2019;42:931–937
256. Castera L, Cusi K. Diabetes and cirrhosis:
current concepts on diagnosis and management.
Hepatology 2023;77:2128–2146
257. Loomba R, Abdelmalek MF, Armstrong MJ,
et al.; NN9931-4492 investigators. Semaglutide
2.4 mg once weekly in patients with non-
alcoholic
steatohepatitis-related
cirrhosis:
a
randomised, placebo-controlled phase 2 trial.
Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol 2023;8:511–522
258. Aminian A, Al-Kurd A, Wilson R, et al.
Association of bariatric surgery with major adverse
liver and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with
biopsy-proven nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. JAMA
2021;326:2031–2042
259. Fakhry
TK,
Mhaskar
R,
Schwitalla
T,
Muradova E, Gonzalvo JP, Murr MM. Bariatric
surgery improves nonalcoholic fatty liver disease:
a contemporary systematic review and meta-
analysis. Surg Obes Relat Dis 2019;15:502–511
260. Ramai D, Singh J, Lester J, et al. Systematic
review with meta-analysis: bariatric surgery
reduces the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2021;53:977–984
261. Kim RG, Loomba R, Prokop LJ, Singh S.
Statin use and risk of cirrhosis and related
complications in patients with chronic liver diseases:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017;15:1521–1530.e8
262. Kaplan DE, Serper MA, Mehta R, et al.
Effects
of
hypercholesterolemia
and
statin
exposure on survival in a large national cohort of
patients with cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 2019;156:
1693–1706.e2
263. Li C, Ford ES, Zhao G, Croft JB, Balluz LS,
Mokdad AH. Prevalence of self-reported clinically
diagnosed sleep apnea according to obesity
status in men and women: National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey, 2005-2006. Prev
Med 2010;51:18–23
264. West SD, Nicoll DJ, Stradling JR. Prevalence
of obstructive sleep apnoea in men with type 2
diabetes.Thorax 2006;61:945–950
265. Resnick HE, Redline S, Shahar E, et al.;
Sleep Heart Health Study. Diabetes and sleep
disturbances: ﬁndings from the Sleep Heart
Health Study. Diabetes Care 2003;26:702–709
266. Foster GD, Sanders MH, Millman R, et al.;
Sleep AHEAD Research Group. Obstructive
sleep apnea among obese patients with type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2009;32:1017–1019
267. Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, Curry SJ,
et al.; US Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for obstructive sleep apnea in adults:
US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. JAMA 2017;317:407–414
268. Shaw JE, Punjabi NM, Wilding JP, Alberti KG;
International Diabetes Federation Taskforce on
Epidemiology and Prevention. Sleep-disordered
breathing and type 2 diabetes: a report from the
International Diabetes Federation Taskforce on
Epidemiology and Prevention. Diabetes Res Clin
Pract 2008;81:2–12
269. Piciucchi M, Capurso G, Archibugi L, Delle
Fave MM, Capasso M, Delle Fave G. Exocrine
pancreatic insufﬁciency in diabetic patients:
prevalence, mechanisms, and treatment. Int J
Endocrinol 2015;2015:595649
270. Lee YK, Huang MY, Hsu CY, Su YC.
Bidirectional relationship between diabetes and
acute pancreatitis: a population-based cohort
study in Taiwan. Medicine (Baltimore) 2016;95:
e2448
271. Das SL, Singh PP, Phillips AR, Murphy R,
Windsor JA, Petrov MS. Newly diagnosed diabetes
mellitus after acute pancreatitis: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Gut 2014;63:818–831
272. Petrov MS. Diabetes of the exocrine pancreas:
American Diabetes Association-compliant lexicon.
Pancreatology 2017;17:523–526
273. Thomsen RW, Pedersen L, Møller N, Kahlert
J, Beck-Nielsen H, Sørensen HT. Incretin-based
therapy and risk of acute pancreatitis: a
nationwide population-based case-control study.
Diabetes Care 2015;38:1089–1098
274. Tkac I, Raz I. Combined analysis of three
large interventional trials with gliptins indicates
increased incidence of acute pancreatitis in
patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care
2017;40:284–286
275. Egan AG, Blind E, Dunder K, et al.
Pancreatic safety of incretin-based drugs—FDA
and EMA assessment. N Engl J Med 2014;370:
794–797
276. Bellin MD, Gelrud A, Arreaza-Rubin G, et al.
Total pancreatectomy with islet autotransplantation:
summary of an NIDDK workshop. Ann Surg
2015;261:21–29
277. Sutherland DE, Radosevich DM, Bellin MD,
et al. Total pancreatectomy and islet autotrans-
plantation for chronic pancreatitis. J Am Coll Surg
2012;214:409–424; discussion 424–426
278. Quartuccio M, Hall E, Singh V, et al.
Glycemic predictors of insulin independence
after total pancreatectomy with islet autotrans-
plantation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2017;102:
801–809
279. Webb MA, Illouz SC, Pollard CA, et al. Islet
auto transplantation following total pancre-
atectomy: a long-term assessment of graft function.
Pancreas 2008;37:282–287
280. Wu Q, Zhang M, Qin Y, et al. Systematic review
and meta-analysis of islet autotransplantation after
total pancreatectomy in chronic pancreatitis patients.
Endocr J 2015;62:227–234
281. Khader YS, Dauod AS, El-Qaderi SS, Alkafajei
A, Batayha WQ. Periodontal status of diabetics
compared with nondiabetics: a meta-analysis. J
Diabetes Complications 2006;20:59–68
282. Casanova L, Hughes FJ, Preshaw PM. Diabetes
and periodontal disease: a two-way relationship. Br
Dent J 2014;217:433–437
283. Eke PI,Thornton-Evans GO,Wei L, Borgnakke
WS, Dye BA, Genco RJ. Periodontitis in US adults:
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
2009-2014. J Am Dent Assoc 2018;149:576–588.e6
284. Simpson TC, Weldon JC, Worthington HV,
et al. Treatment of periodontal disease for
glycaemic control in people with diabetes mellitus.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;2015:CD004714
285. Borgnakke WS,Yl€ostalo PV,Taylor GW, Genco
RJ. Effect of periodontal disease on diabetes:
systematic review of epidemiologic observational
evidence. J Periodontol 2013;84(Suppl.):S135–
S152
286. D’Aiuto F, Gkranias N, Bhowruth D, et al.;
TASTE Group. Systemic effects of periodontitis
treatment in patients with type 2 diabetes: a
diabetesjournals.org/care
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S75
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

12 month, single-centre, investigator-masked,
randomised trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
2018;6:954–965
287. Baiduc RR, Helzner EP. Epidemiology of
diabetes and hearing loss. Semin Hear 2019;40:
281–291
288. Helzner EP, Contrera KJ. Type 2 diabetes and
hearing impairment. Curr Diab Rep 2016;16:3
289. Hicks CW, Wang D, Lin FR, Reed N,
Windham BG, Selvin E. Peripheral neuropathy
and vision and hearing impairment in US adults
with and without diabetes. Am J Epidemiol 2023;
192:237–245
290. Bainbridge KE, Hoffman HJ, Cowie CC. Risk
factors for hearing impairment among U.S. adults
with diabetes: National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey 1999-2004. Diabetes Care
2011;34:1540–1545
291. Schade DS, Lorenzi GM, Braffett BH, et al.;
DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Hearing impairment
and type 1 diabetes in the Diabetes Control and
Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes
Interventions and Complications (DCCT/EDIC)
cohort. Diabetes Care 2018;41:2495–2501
292. Rasmussen VF, Vestergaard ET, Hejlesen O,
Andersson CUN, Cichosz SL. Prevalence of taste and
smell impairment in adults with diabetes: a cross-
sectional analysis of data from the National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES). Prim
Care Diabetes 2018;12:453–459
293. Richardson K, Schoen M, French B, et al.
Statins and cognitive function: a systematic
review. Ann Intern Med 2013;159:688–697
294. Davies MJ, Aroda VR, Collins BS, et al.
Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes,
2022. A consensus report by the American Diabetes
Association (ADA) and the European Association for
the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care 2022;
45:2753–2786
295. Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention. Interim clinical considerations for use of
COVID-19 vaccines: appendices, references, and
previous updates. 2023. Accessed 20 August
2023.
Available
from
https://www.cdc.gov/
vaccines/covid-19/clinical-considerations/interim
-considerations-us-appendix.html
296. Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention. Prevention and control of seasonal
inﬂuenza with vaccines: recommendations of the
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices—
United
States,
2023–24
inﬂuenza
season.
Accessed 20 August 2023. Available from https://
www.cdc.gov/ﬂu/season/faq-ﬂu-season-2023-
2024.htm
297. Havers FP, Moro PL, Hunter P, Hariri S,
Bernstein H. Use of tetanus toxoid, reduced
diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis vaccines:
updated
recommendations
of
the
Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices–United
States, 2019. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
2020;69:77–83
298. Dooling KL, Guo A, Patel M, et al.
Recommendations of the advisory committee on
immunization practices for use of herpes zoster
vaccines. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2018;
67:103–108
S76
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

5. Facilitating Positive Health
Behaviors and Well-being to
Improve Health Outcomes:
Standards of Care in
Diabetes—2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S77–S110 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S005
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes
the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the
components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to
evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee, an in-
terprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of Care
annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA stand-
ards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical
practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee members,
please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the
Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
Building positive health behaviors and maintaining psychological well-being are foun-
dational for achieving diabetes management goals and maximizing quality of life
(1,2). Essential to achieving these goals are diabetes self-management education and
support (DSMES), medical nutrition therapy (MNT), routine physical activity, counsel-
ing and treatment to support cessation of tobacco products and vaping, health be-
havior counseling, and psychosocial care. Following an initial comprehensive health
evaluation (see Section 4, “Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of
Comorbidities”), health care professionals are encouraged to engage in person-
centered collaborative care with people with diabetes (3–6), an approach that is
guided by shared decision-making in treatment plan selection; facilitation of obtain-
ing medical, behavioral, psychosocial, and technology resources and support; and
shared monitoring of agreed-upon diabetes care plans and behavioral goals (7,8).
Reevaluation during routine care should include assessment of medical and behav-
ioral health outcomes, especially during times of change in health and well-being.
DIABETES SELF-MANAGEMENT EDUCATION AND SUPPORT
Recommendations
5.1 Strongly encourage all people with diabetes to participate in diabetes self-
management education and support (DSMES) to facilitate informed decision-
making, self-care behaviors, problem-solving, and active collaboration with
the health care team. A
5.2 In addition to annually, there are critical times to evaluate the need for DSMES
to promote skills acquisition to aid treatment plan implementation, medical
*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee. 5. Facilitating
positive health behaviors and well-being to
improve health outcomes: Standards of Care in
Diabetes—2024. Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):
S77–S110
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
5. FACILITATING POSITIVE HEALTH BEHAVIORS
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
S77
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

nutrition therapy, and well-being: at
diagnosis, when not meeting treat-
ment goals, when complicating fac-
tors develop (medical, physical, and
psychosocial), and when transitions in
life and care occur. E
5.3 Clinical outcomes, health status,
and well-being are key goals of DSMES
that should be assessed as part of rou-
tine care. C
5.4 DSMES should be culturally sensi-
tive and responsive to individual pref-
erences, needs, and values and may
be offered in group or individual set-
tings. A Such education and support
should be documented and made avail-
able to members of the entire diabetes
care team. E
5.5 Consider offering DSMES via tele-
health and/or digital interventions to
address barriers to access and improve
satisfaction. B
5.6 Since DSMES can improve outcomes
and reduce costs, reimbursement by
third-party payers is recommended. B
5.7 Identify and address barriers to
DSMES that exist at the payer, health
system, clinic, health care profes-
sional, and individual levels. E
5.8 Include social determinants of
health of the target population in
guiding design and delivery of DSMES
C with the ultimate goal of health
equity across all populations.
The overall objectives of DSMES are to
support informed decision-making, self-
care behaviors, problem-solving, and ac-
tive collaboration with the health care
team to improve clinical outcomes, health
status, and well-being in a cost-effective
manner (2). DSMES services facilitate the
knowledge, decision-making, and skills
mastery necessary for optimal diabetes
self-care and incorporate the needs, goals,
and life experiences of the person with
diabetes. Health care professionals are
encouraged to consider the burden of
treatment (9) and the person’s level of
conﬁdence and self-efﬁcacy for manage-
ment behaviors as well as the level of so-
cial and family support when providing
DSMES. An individual’s engagement in
self-management behaviors and the ef-
fects on clinical outcomes, health status,
and quality of life, as well as the psychoso-
cial factors impacting the person’s ability
to self-manage, should be monitored as
part of routine clinical care. A randomized
controlled trial (RCT) testing a decision-
making education and skill-building pro-
gram (10) showed that addressing these
targets improved health outcomes in a
population in need of health care resour-
ces. Furthermore, following a DSMES cur-
riculum improves quality of care (11).
As the use of judgmental words is asso-
ciated with increased feelings of shame
and guilt, health care professionals are
encouraged to consider the impact that
language has on building therapeutic re-
lationships and should choose positive,
strength-based words and phrases that
put people ﬁrst (4,12). Please see Section 4,
“Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and
Assessment of Comorbidities,” for more on
use of language.
In accordance with the national stand-
ards for DSMES (13), all people with dia-
betes should participate in DSMES, as it
helps people with diabetes to identify and
implement
effective
self-management
strategies and cope with diabetes (2). On-
going DSMES helps people with diabetes
to maintain effective self-management
throughout the life course as they en-
counter new challenges and as advances
in treatment become available (14).
In addition to annually, there are critical
time points when the need for DSMES
should be evaluated by the health care
professional and/or interprofessional team,
with referrals made as needed (2):
• At diagnosis
• When not meeting treatment goals
• When complicating factors (e.g., health
conditions, physical limitations, emo-
tional factors, or basic living needs) that
inﬂuence self-management develop
• When transitions in life and care occur
DSMES focuses on empowering individu-
als with diabetes by providing them with the
tools to make informed self-management
decisions (15). DSMES should be person-
centered; this is an approach that places
the person with diabetes and their family
and/or support system at the center of
the care model, working in collaboration
with health care professionals. Person-
centered care is respectful of and respon-
sive to individual and cultural preferences,
needs, and values. It ensures that the val-
ues of the person with diabetes guide all
decision-making (16).
Evidence for the Benefits
DSMES is associated with improved dia-
betes knowledge and self-care behaviors
(17), lower A1C (17–22), lower self-reported
weight (23), improved quality of life
(19,24,25), reduced all-cause mortality
risk (26), positive coping behaviors (5,27),
and lower health care costs (28–30). DSMES
is associated with an increased use of pri-
mary care and preventive services (28,31,32)
and less frequent use of acute care and inpa-
tient hospital services (23). People with dia-
betes who participate in DSMES are more
likely to follow best practice treatment
recommendations, particularly those with
Medicare, and have lower Medicare and
insurance claim costs (29,32). Better out-
comes were reported for DSMES interven-
tions that were >10 h over the course of
6–12 months (20), included ongoing sup-
port (14,33), were culturally (34–36) and
age appropriate (37,38), were tailored
to individual needs and preferences, ad-
dressed psychosocial issues, and incorpo-
rated behavioral strategies (15,27,39,40).
Individual and group approaches are ef-
fective (41–43), with a slight beneﬁt real-
ized by those who engage in both (20).
Strong evidence now exists on the
beneﬁts of virtual, telehealth, telephone-
based, or internet-based DSMES for dia-
betes prevention and management in a
wide variety of populations and age-
groups of people with diabetes (44–56).
Technologies such as mobile apps, simu-
lation tools, digital coaching, and digital
self-management interventions can also
be used to deliver DSMES (57–62). These
methods provide comparable or even im-
proved outcomes compared with traditional
in-person care (63). Greater A1C reductions
are demonstrated with increased engage-
ment (64), although data from trials are
considerably heterogeneous.
Technology-enabled diabetes self-
management solutions improve A1C most
effectively when there is two-way commu-
nication between the person with diabetes
and the health care team, individualized
feedback, use of person-generated health
data, and education (47). Continuous glu-
cose monitoring (CGM), when combined
with individualized diabetes education or
behavioral interventions, has demonstrated
greater improvement on glycemic and psy-
chosocial outcomes compared with CGM
alone (64,65). Similarly, DSMES plus inter-
mittently scanned CGM has demonstrated
increased time in range (70–180 mg/dL
[3.9–10.0 mmol/L]), less time above range,
S78
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

and a greater reduction in A1C compared
with DSMES alone (66). Incorporating a
systematic approach for technology as-
sessment, adoption, and integration into
the care plan may help ensure equity in
access and standardized application of
technology-enabled
solutions
(www
.diabeteseducator.org/danatech/home)
(8,31,67–70).
Research supports diabetes care and
education specialists (DCES), including
nurses (registered nurses and nurse prac-
titioners), registered dietitian nutritionists
(RDNs), pharmacists, and other health
professionals as providers of DSMES who
can also tailor curricula to individual needs
(71–73). Members of the DSMES team
should have specialized clinical knowledge
of diabetes and behavior change principles.
In addition, a DCES needs to be knowledge-
able about technology-enabled services
and may serve as a technology champion
within their practice (68). Certiﬁcation as a
DCES (cbdce.org/) and/or board certiﬁ-
cation in advanced diabetes manage-
ment (diabeteseducator.org/education/
certiﬁcation/bc_adm) demonstrates an
individual’s specialized training in and
understanding of diabetes management
and support (56), and engagement with
qualiﬁed professionals has been shown
to improve diabetes-related outcomes
(74). Additionally, there is growing evi-
dence for the role of community health
workers (75,76), as well as peer (75–80)
and lay leaders (81), in providing ongoing
support.
Given individual needs and access to re-
sources, a variety of culturally adapted
DSMES programs need to be offered in a
variety of settings. The use of technology
to facilitate access to DSMES, support
self-management decisions, and decrease
therapeutic inertia calls for broader adop-
tion of these approaches (82). Additionally,
it is important to include social determi-
nants of health (SDOH) of the target popu-
lation in guiding design and delivery of
DSMES. The DSMES team should consider
demographic characteristics such as race,
ethnic/cultural background, sex/gender,
age, geographic location, technology ac-
cess, education, literacy, and numeracy
(56,83). For example, a systematic review
and meta-analysis of telehealth DSMES in-
terventions with Black and Hispanic people
with diabetes showed a 0.465% decrease
in A1C, demonstrating the importance of
considering demographic factors in rela-
tion to DSMES interventions (53).
Despite the beneﬁts of DSMES, data
from the 2017 and 2018 Behavioral Risk
Factor Surveillance System of 61,424
adults with self-reported diabetes indi-
cate that only 53% of individuals eligible
for DSMES through their health insur-
ance receive it (84). Barriers to DSMES
exist at the health system, payer, clinic,
health care professional, and individual
levels. Low participation may be due to
lack of referral or other identiﬁed bar-
riers, such as logistical issues (accessibil-
ity, timing, and costs) and the lack of a
perceived beneﬁt (85). Health system,
clinic, programmatic, and payer barriers
include lack of administrative leadership
support, limited numbers of DSMES pro-
fessionals, not having a referral to DSMES
effectively embedded in the health sys-
tem service structure, and limited reim-
bursement rates (86). Thus, in addition to
educating referring health care professio-
nals about the beneﬁts of DSMES and the
critical times to refer, efforts need to be
made to identify and address potential
barriers at each level (2). For example, a
multilevel diabetes care intervention that
combined clinical outreach, standardized
protocols, and DSMES with SDOH screen-
ing and referrals to social needs support
documented a 15% increase in receipt of
DSMES, including among people on Med-
icaid (87). Support from institutional lead-
ership is foundational for the success of
DSMES. Expert stakeholders should also
support DSMES by providing input and
advocacy (56). Alternative and innovative
models of DSMES delivery (58) need to
be explored and evaluated, including the
integration of technology-enabled diabe-
tes and cardiometabolic health services
(8,68). One potential model is virtual envi-
ronments, which allow people with diabe-
tes to self-represent as avatars and interact
in a world with embedded informational re-
sources accessed using principles of gamiﬁ-
cation. An RCT testing DSMES in a virtual
environment demonstrated greater weight
loss but similar decreases in A1C, blood
pressure, cholesterol, and triglycerides com-
pared with DSMES via a standard website
(88). Barriers to equitable access to DSMES
may be addressed through telehealth deliv-
ery of care, virtual environments, and other
digital health solutions (56).
Reimbursement
Medicare reimburses DSMES when that
service meets the national standards
(2,56) and is recognized by the American
Diabetes Association (ADA) through the Ed-
ucation Recognition Program (professional
.diabetes.org/diabetes-education) or by
the Association of Diabetes Care & Educa-
tion Specialists (diabeteseducator.org/
practice/diabetes-education-accreditation-
program). DSMES is also covered by most
health insurance plans. Ongoing support
has been shown to be instrumental for im-
proving outcomes when it is implemented
after the completion of education services.
Medicare reimburses remote physiologic
monitoring for glucose and other cardio-
metabolic data if certain conditions are
met (89). For Medicare Part B, the basics
of the DSMES beneﬁt include individual
encounters reimbursable for the ﬁrst 10 h
(1 h of individual training and 9 h of group
training); if special needs that would inter-
fere with effective group participation are
identiﬁed on the referral order, individual
DSMES encounters are reimbursable for
the initial 10 h. For Medicaid, DSMES cov-
erage varies by state.
Although DSMES is frequently reim-
bursed when performed in person, DSMES
can also be provided via telehealth and
phone calls (13). These versions may not
always be reimbursed; however, changes
in reimbursement policies that increase
DSMES access and utilization will result in
a positive impact on beneﬁciaries’ clinical
outcomes, quality of life, health care utili-
zation, and costs (13,90–92). During the
time of the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic, reimbursement
policies were revised (professional.diabetes
.org/content-page/dsmes-and-mnt-during-
covid-19-national-pandemic),
and
these
changes may provide a new reimburse-
ment paradigm for future provision of
DSMES through telehealth channels. Per
updated guidance from the Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services, DSMES tel-
ehealth reimbursements remain the same
as they were during the public health
emergency for most practice settings. Both
ADA-recognized and Association of Diabe-
tes Care & Education Specialists–accredited
programs were added to the list of
approved telehealth professionals via the
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023.
The reimbursement of DSMES telehealth
services was extended through the end of
2024. Importantly, DSMES is paid on the
physician fee schedule and not the outpa-
tient prospective payment system. Per the
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023,
distant-site health care professionals may
diabetesjournals.org/care
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
S79
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

be able to bill DSMES as a Medicare tele-
health service through 31 December 2024.
MEDICAL NUTRITION THERAPY
When the ﬁrst ADA Standards of Care
guidelines were published in 1989, nutri-
tion was mentioned in two sentences in
the entire 4-page document (93). Even
now, in 2024, the science of nutrition for
diabetes continues to evolve. At the same
time, there has been change of emphasis
from nutrients (macronutrients and micro-
nutrients) to a focus on foods and, more
broadly, dietary patterns. This integrative
approach aligns with the 2021 American
Heart Association dietary guidance to im-
prove cardiovascular health (94), the Kid-
ney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes
(KDIGO) guidelines (95), the European As-
sociation for the Study of Diabetes/ADA
type 1 consensus report (96) and type 2
consensus report (97), and the Dietary
Guidelines for Americans, 2020–2025 (98).
Simply put, people eat food, not nutrients,
and nutrient recommendations need to be
applied to what people eat. Additionally,
macronutrients are not interchangeable
entities and vary by nutrient type and qual-
ity. As an example, carbohydrates include
legumes, whole grains, and fruits and are
in the same category as reﬁned grains, but
their health effects are very different (99).
For more detailed information on nu-
trition therapy, please refer to the ADA
consensus report on nutrition therapy
(73). Contained in the report is an impor-
tant and often repeated tenet, i.e., there
is not a one-size-ﬁts-all eating pattern for
individuals with diabetes, and meal plan-
ning should be individualized. Nutrition
therapy plays an integral role in overall di-
abetes management, and each person
with diabetes should be actively engaged
in education, self-management, and treat-
ment planning with the health care team,
including the collaborative development
of an individualized eating plan (73,100).
All health care professionals should refer
people with diabetes for individualized
MNT provided by an RDN who is knowl-
edgeable and skilled in providing diabetes-
speciﬁc MNT (101–103) at diagnosis and
as needed throughout the life span, similar
to DSMES. MNT delivered by an RDN is as-
sociated with A1C absolute decreases of
1.0–1.9% for people with type 1 diabetes
(104) and 0.3–2.0% for people with type 2
diabetes (104). See Table 5.1 for speciﬁc
nutrition recommendations. Because of
the progressive nature of type 2 diabetes,
behavior modiﬁcation alone may not be
adequate to maintain euglycemia over
time. However, after medication is initi-
ated, nutrition therapy continues to be an
important component, and RDNs provid-
ing MNT in diabetes care should assess
and monitor medication changes in rela-
tion to the nutrition care plan (73,100).
Goals of Nutrition Therapy for All
People With Diabetes
1. To promote and support healthful eat-
ing patterns, emphasizing a variety of
nutrient-dense foods in appropriate
portion sizes, to improve overall health
and:
• achieve and maintain body weight
goals
• attain individualized glycemic, blood
pressure, and lipid goals
• delay or prevent the complications
of diabetes
2. To address individual nutrition needs
based on personal and cultural prefer-
ences, health literacy and numeracy, ac-
cess to healthful foods, willingness and
ability to make behavioral changes, and
existing barriers to change
3. To maintain the pleasure of eating
by providing nonjudgmental messages
about food choices while limiting food
choices only when indicated by scien-
tiﬁc evidence
4. To provide an individual with diabetes
the practical tools for developing healthy
eating patterns rather than focusing
on individual macronutrients, micronu-
trients, or single foods
Weight Management
Management and reduction of weight is
important for people with type 1 diabe-
tes, type 2 diabetes, or prediabetes with
overweight or obesity. To support weight
loss and improve A1C, cardiovascular dis-
ease (CVD) risk factors, and well-being in
adults with overweight/obesity and pre-
diabetes or diabetes, MNT and DSMES
services should include an individualized
eating plan in a format that results in an
energy deﬁcit in combination with en-
hanced physical activity (73). Lifestyle in-
tervention programs should be intensive
and have frequent follow-up to achieve
signiﬁcant reductions in excess body
weight and improve clinical indicators.
Behavior modiﬁcation targets include
physical activity, calorie restriction, weight
management strategies, and motivation.
There is strong and consistent evidence
that modest, sustained weight loss can delay
the progression from prediabetes to type 2
diabetes (103,105,106) (see Section 3,
“Prevention or Delay of Diabetes and
Associated Comorbidities”) and is beneﬁ-
cial for the management of type 2 diabe-
tes (see Section 8, “Obesity and Weight
Management for the Prevention and
Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes”).
In prediabetes, the weight loss goal is
5–7% or higher for reducing risk of pro-
gression to type 2 diabetes (107). In con-
junction with support for healthy lifestyle
behaviors, medication-assisted weight
loss can be considered for people at risk
for type 2 diabetes when needed to
achieve and sustain 7–10% weight loss
(108,109) (see Section 8, “Obesity and
Weight Management for the Prevention
and Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes”). Peo-
ple with prediabetes at a healthy weight
should also be considered for behavioral
interventions to help establish routine aer-
obic and resistance exercise (107,110,111)
as well as to establish healthy eating pat-
terns. Services delivered by health care
professionals familiar with diabetes and its
management, such as an RDN, have been
found to be effective (102).
For many individuals with overweight
and obesity with type 2 diabetes, 5%
weight loss is needed to achieve beneﬁ-
cial outcomes in glycemic control, lipids,
and blood pressure (112,113). It should
be noted, however, that the clinical ben-
eﬁts of weight loss are progressive, and
more intensive weight loss goals (i.e.,
15%) may be appropriate to maximize
beneﬁt depending on need, feasibility,
and safety (114,115). Long-term durabil-
ity of weight loss remains a challenge;
however, newer medications (beyond
metabolic surgery) may have potential
for sustainability, impact on cardiovas-
cular outcomes, and weight reduction
beyond 10–15% (116–120).
In select individuals with type 2 diabe-
tes, an overall healthy eating plan that re-
sults in energy deﬁcit in conjunction with
weight loss medications and/or metabolic
surgery should be considered to help
achieve weight loss and maintenance
goals, lower A1C, and reduce CVD risk
(108,121,122). Overweight and obesity
are also increasingly prevalent in people
with type 1 diabetes and present clinical
challenges regarding diabetes treatment
S80
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Table 5.1—Medical nutrition therapy recommendations
Recommendations
Effectiveness of nutrition therapy
5.9 An individualized medical nutrition therapy program as needed to achieve treatment
goals, provided by a registered dietitian nutritionist, preferably one who has compre-
hensive knowledge and experience in diabetes care, is recommended for all people
with type 1 or type 2 diabetes, prediabetes, and gestational diabetes mellitus. A
5.10 Because diabetes medical nutrition therapy can result in cost savings B and improved
cardiometabolic outcomes, A medical nutrition therapy should be adequately reim-
bursed by insurance and other payers. E
Energy balance
5.11 For all people with overweight or obesity, behavioral modiﬁcation to achieve and
maintain a minimum weight loss of 5% is recommended. A
Eating patterns and macronutrient distribution
5.12 For diabetes prevention and management of people with prediabetes or diabetes,
recommend individualized meal plans that keep nutrient quality, total calories, and
metabolic goals in mind, B as data do not support a speciﬁc macronutrient pattern.
5.13 Food-based dietary patterns should emphasize key nutrition principles (inclusion of
nonstarchy vegetables, whole fruits, legumes, whole grains, nuts/seeds, and low-fat
dairy products and minimizing consumption of meat, sugar-sweetened beverages,
sweets, reﬁned grains, and ultraprocessed foods) in people with prediabetes and dia-
betes. B
5.14 Consider reducing overall carbohydrate intake for adults with diabetes to improve
glycemia, as this approach may be applied to a variety of eating patterns that meet
individual needs and preferences. B
Carbohydrates
5.15 Emphasize minimally processed, nutrient-dense, high-ﬁber sources of carbohydrate
(at least 14 g ﬁber per 1,000 kcal). B
5.16 People with diabetes and those at risk are advised to replace sugar-sweetened bev-
erages (including fruit juices) with water or low-calorie or no-calorie beverages as
much as possible to manage glycemia and reduce risk for cardiometabolic disease B
and minimize consumption of foods with added sugar that have the capacity to dis-
place healthier, more nutrient-dense food choices. A
5.17 Provide education on the glycemic impact of carbohydrate, A fat, and protein B
tailored to an individual’s needs, insulin plan, and preferences to optimize mealtime
insulin dosing.
5.18 When using ﬁxed insulin doses, individuals should be provided with education about
consistent patterns of carbohydrate intake with respect to time and amount while
considering the insulin action time, as it can result in improved glycemia and reduce
the risk for hypoglycemia. B
Protein
5.19 For people with type 2 diabetes, consider avoiding carbohydrate sources high in pro-
tein when treating or preventing hypoglycemia, as ingested protein appears to in-
crease insulin response without increasing plasma glucose concentrations. B
Dietary fat
5.20 Counsel people with diabetes to consider an eating plan emphasizing elements of a
Mediterranean eating pattern, which is rich in monounsaturated and polyunsatu-
rated fats and long-chain fatty acids such as fatty ﬁsh, nuts, and seeds, to reduce
cardiovascular disease risk A and improve glucose metabolism. B
Micronutrients and herbal supplements
5.21 Dietary supplementation with vitamins, minerals (such as chromium and vitamin D),
herbs, or spices (such as cinnamon or aloe vera) are not recommended for glycemic
beneﬁts. Health care professionals should inquire about intake of supplements and
counsel as needed. C
5.22 Counsel against b-carotene supplementation, as there is evidence of harm for certain
individuals and it confers no beneﬁt. B
Alcohol
5.23 Advise adults with diabetes who consume alcohol to not exceed the recommended daily
limits (one drink per day for adult women and two drinks per day for adult men). C
Advise abstainers to not start to drink, even in moderation, solely for the purpose of im-
proving health outcomes. C
5.24 Educating people with diabetes about the signs, symptoms, and self-management of
delayed hypoglycemia after drinking alcohol, especially when using insulin or insulin
secretagogues, is recommended. The importance of monitoring glucose after drinking
alcoholic beverages to reduce hypoglycemia risk should be emphasized. B
Sodium
5.25 Counsel people with diabetes to limit sodium consumption to <2,300 mg/day. B
Nonnutritive sweeteners
5.26 Counsel people with prediabetes and diabetes that water is recommended over nu-
tritive and nonnutritive sweetened beverages. However, the use of nonnutritive
sweeteners as a replacement for sugar-sweetened products in moderation is accept-
able if it reduces overall calorie and carbohydrate intake. B
diabetesjournals.org/care
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
S81
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

and CVD risk factors (123,124). Sustaining
weight loss can be challenging (112,125)
but has long-term beneﬁts; maintaining
weight loss for 5 years is associated with
sustained improvements in A1C and lipid
levels (126). MNT guidance from an RDN
with expertise in diabetes and weight
management throughout the course of a
structured weight loss plan is strongly
recommended.
Along with routine medical management
visits, people with diabetes and prediabetes
should be screened during DSMES and
MNT encounters for a history of dieting and
past or current disordered eating behaviors.
Nutrition therapy should be individualized
to help address maladaptive eating behav-
ior (e.g., purging) or compensatory changes
in medical treatment plan (e.g., overtreat-
ment of hypoglycemic episodes and re-
duction in medication dosing to reduce
hunger) (73) (see DISORDERED EATING BEHAVIOR,
below). Disordered eating, eating disor-
ders, and/or disrupted eating can in-
crease challenges for weight and diabetes
management. For example, caloric restric-
tion may be essential for glycemic man-
agement and weight maintenance, but
rigid meal plans may be contraindicated
for individuals who are at increased risk
of clinically signiﬁcant maladaptive eating
behaviors (127). If eating disorders are
identiﬁed during screening with diabetes-
speciﬁc questionnaires, individuals should
be referred to a qualiﬁed behavioral
health professional (1).
Studies have demonstrated that a vari-
ety of eating plans, varying in macronutri-
ent composition, can be used effectively
and safely in the short term (1–2 years) to
achieve weight loss in people with diabe-
tes. These plans include structured low-
calorie meal plans with meal replacements
(114,126,128), a Mediterranean eating
pattern (129), and low-carbohydrate meal
plans with additional support (130,131).
However, no single approach has been
proven to be consistently superior (73,
132–134), and more data are needed to
identify and validate those meal plans
that are optimal with respect to long-
term outcomes and acceptability. Any
approach to meal planning should be in-
dividualized, considering the health sta-
tus, personal and cultural preferences,
health goals, ability to sustain the recom-
mendations, and ultimately food access
and nutrition security (73).
Food Insecurity and Access
Food insecurity is deﬁned as a lack of con-
sistent access to enough food for an active,
healthy life (135). Food insecurity affects
16% of adults with diabetes compared
with 9% of adults without diabetes (136).
There is a complex bidirectional association
between food insecurity and cooccurring
diabetes. Food security screening should
happen at all levels of the health care sys-
tem. Any member of the health care team
can screen for food insecurity using The
Hunger Vital Sign. Households are consid-
ered at risk if they answer either or both of
the following statements as “often true” or
“sometimes true” (compared with “never
true”) (137):
• “Within the past 12 months, we wor-
ried whether our food would run out
before we got money to buy more.”
• “Within the past 12 months, the
food we bought just didn’t last, and
we didn’t have money to get more.”
If screening is positive for food insecurity,
efforts should be made to make referrals to
appropriate programs and resources. For
more information on efforts and policy rec-
ommendations, see “The Biden-Harris Ad-
ministration National Strategy on Hunger,
Nutrition, and Health” (138).
Eating Patterns and Meal Planning
For an understanding of nutrition and di-
abetes, it is important to clarify the dif-
ferences between food patterns, eating
plans, and approaches. These are terms
that are often used interchangeably, but
they are different and relevant in individ-
ualizing nutrition care plans (139).
• Eating pattern(s) or food pattern(s).
The totality of all foods and beverages
consumed over a given period of time.
An eating pattern can be ascribed to an
individual, but it is also the term used
in prospective cohort and observational
nutrition studies to classify and study
nutrition patterns. Examples of eating
patterns include Mediterranean style,
Dietary Approaches to Stop Hyperten-
sion (DASH), low-carbohydrate vegetar-
ian, and plant based (139).
• Eating/meal plan (historically referred
to as a diet). An individualized guide to
help plan when, what, and how much
to eat on a daily basis, completed by
the person with diabetes and the RDN.
The eating plan could incorporate an
eating pattern combined with a strat-
egy or method to direct some of the
choices. Eating plans are based on the
individual’s usual eating style.
• Dietary approach. Method or strategy
to individualize a desired eating pattern
and provide a practical tool(s) for devel-
oping healthy eating patterns. Examples
of dietary approaches include the plate
method, carbohydrate choice, carbohy-
drate counting, and highly individual-
ized behavioral approaches (140).
Evidence suggests that there is not an
ideal percentage of calories from carbo-
hydrate, protein, and fat for people with
diabetes. Therefore, macronutrient distri-
bution should be based on an individual-
ized assessment of current eating patterns,
preferences, and metabolic goals. Mem-
bers of the health care team should com-
plement MNT by providing evidence-based
guidance that helps people with diabetes
make healthy food choices that meet their
individualized needs and improve overall
health.
Research conﬁrms that a variety of eat-
ing patterns are acceptable for the man-
agement of diabetes (73,104,141,142).
Until the evidence around beneﬁts of dif-
ferent eating patterns is strengthened,
health care professionals should focus on
the core dimensions common among pat-
terns: inclusion of nonstarchy vegetables,
whole fruits, legumes, whole grains, nuts,
seeds, and low-fat dairy products and
minimizing consumption of meat, sugar-
sweetened beverages, sweets, reﬁned
grains, and ultraprocessed foods (143,144).
Evidence for eating patterns has been
informed by RCTs, prospective cohort
studies, systematic reviews, and network
meta-analysis. Those most frequently
referenced include Mediterranean, DASH,
low-fat, carbohydrate-restricted, vegetarian,
and vegan eating patterns. As stated previ-
ously, there is insufﬁcient evidence to select
one over the other (137,141,142,145–154).
Ultimately, ongoing diabetes and nutrition
education paired with appropriate support
to implement and sustain health behaviors
is recommended (103).
Meal Planning
Referral to and ongoing support from an
RDN is essential to assess the overall nu-
trition status of, and to work collabora-
tively with, the person with diabetes to
create a personalized meal plan that
S82
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

coordinates and aligns with the overall
lifestyle treatment plan, including physical
activity and medication use. Using shared
decision-making to collaboratively select
a method for how to execute the plan
may be part of the nutrition care process.
Dietary Approaches/Methods
Few head-to-head studies have compared
different dietary approaches. In a system-
atic review and meta-analysis of carbohy-
drate counting versus other forms of
dietary advice (standard education, low
glycemic index, and ﬁxed carbohydrate
quantities), no signiﬁcant differences were
seen in A1C levels compared with stan-
dard education (145). In another RCT,
a simpliﬁed carbohydrate counting tool
based on individual glycemic response was
noninferior to conventional carbohydrate
counting in 85 adults with type 1 diabetes
(146). In a randomized crossover trial, car-
bohydrate counting and qualitative meal
size (low, medium, and high carbohydrate)
were compared. Time in range was 74%
for carbohydrate counting and 70.5% for
the quantitative meal size estimates. Non-
inferiority was not conﬁrmed for the quali-
tative method (147). Newer technologies
(smart phone apps and CGM), including
automated insulin delivery, may decrease
the need for precise carbohydrate count-
ing and allow for personalized nutrition ap-
proaches (148,149).
An RCT found that two meal-planning
approaches (diabetes plate method and
carbohydrate counting) were effective in
helping achieve improved A1C (150). The
diabetes plate method is a commonly
used visual approach for providing basic
meal planning guidance in type 1 and
type 2 diabetes. This simple graphic (fea-
turing a 9-inch plate) shows how to por-
tion foods (one-half of the plate for
nonstarchy vegetables, one-quarter of
the plate for protein, and one-quarter of
the plate for carbohydrates). Carbohy-
drate counting is a more advanced skill
that helps plan for and track how much
carbohydrate is consumed at meals and
snacks. Meal planning approaches should
be customized to the individual, including
their numeracy (150) and food literacy
level. Health numeracy refers to under-
standing and using numbers and numerical
concepts in relation to health and self-
management (155). Food literacy generally
describes proﬁciency in food-related knowl-
edgeandskillsthat ultimatelyimpacthealth,
although speciﬁc deﬁnitions vary across ini-
tiatives (151,152).
Intermittent fasting or time-restricted
eating as strategies for weight and glu-
cose management have been studied
and have gained popularity. Intermittent
fasting is an umbrella term that includes
three main forms of restricted eating: al-
ternate-day fasting (energy restriction of
500–600 calories on alternate days), the
5:2 diet (energy restriction of 500–
600 calories on consecutive or noncon-
secutive days with usual intake the other
ﬁve), and time-restricted eating (daily
calorie restriction based on window of time
of 8–15 h). Each produces mild to moder-
ate weight loss (3–8% loss from baseline)
over short durations (8–12 weeks) with no
signiﬁcant differences in weight loss when
compared with continuous calorie restric-
tion (153,154,156,157). A few studies have
extended up to 52 weeks and show similar
ﬁndings (158–162) with diverse popula-
tions. Generally, time-restricted eating or
shortening the eating window can be
adapted to any eating pattern and has
been shown to be safe for adults with
type 1 or type 2 diabetes (161). People
with diabetes who are on insulin and/or
secretagogues should be medically moni-
tored during the fasting period (163). Be-
cause of the simplicity of intermittent
fasting and time-restricted eating, these
may be useful strategies for people with
diabetes who are looking for practical eat-
ing management tools.
Use of partial meal replacements or to-
tal meal replacements is an additional
tool or strategy for energy restriction.
Meal replacements are prepackaged foods
(bars, shakes, and soups) that contain a
ﬁxed amount of macroutrients and mi-
cronutrients. They have been shown to
improve nutrient quality and glycemic
management and to reduce portion size
and consequent energy intake. In a meta-
analysis involving 17 studies incorporating
both partial and total meal replacements,
greater weight loss and improvement in
A1C and fasting blood glucose were dem-
onstrated compared with conventional di-
ets (164). Meal replacements have been
used in several landmark clinical trials, in-
cluding Look AHEAD (Action for Health in
Diabetes) (165), DiRECT (Diabetes Remis-
sion Clinical Trial) (166), and PREVIEW (Pre-
vention of Diabetes Through Lifestyle
Intervention and Population Studies in
Europe and Around the World) (167),
showing partial or total meal replacements
can be a potential short-term strategy for
weight loss.
Regardless of the eating pattern, meal
plan, and/or dietary approach selected,
long-term follow-up and support from
members of the diabetes care team are
needed to optimize self-efﬁcacy and main-
tain behavioral changes (140).
Chrononutrition is a growing and
emerging specialty in the ﬁeld of nutri-
tion and biology that tries to understand
how the timing of food ingestion affects
metabolic health (168). Glucose metabo-
lism follows a circadian rhythm through
diurnal variation of glucose tolerance,
peaking during daylight hours when food is
consumed. Some preliminary studies show
cardiometabolic beneﬁts when food is con-
sumed earlier (169). Similarly, circadian dis-
ruptions found in shift workers increase
risk of type 2 diabetes (170). Although
more research needs to be done, this
evolving area of research may show prom-
ise to improve glucose regulation.
Religious Fasting
Although intermittent fasting and time-
restricted eating are speciﬁc dietary strat-
egies for energy restriction, religious fast-
ing has been practiced for thousands of
years and is part of many faith-based tra-
ditions. Duration, frequency, and type of
fast vary among different religions (171).
For example, Jewish people abstain from
any intake for 24 h during Yom Kippur
(172,173). For Muslims, Ramadan fasting
lasts for a full month, when abstinence
from any food or drink is required from
dawn to dusk (174). Individuals with dia-
betes who fast have an increased risk for
hypoglycemia, dehydration, hyperglyce-
mia, and ketoacidosis. Risk can vary de-
pending on the type of diabetes, type of
therapy, and presence and severity of dia-
betes-related complications (175). Health
care professionals, including RDNs, certi-
ﬁed DCES, and others, should inquire
about any religious fasting for people
with diabetes and provide education and
support to accommodate their choice.
Education regarding glucose checking,
medication/ﬂuid adjustment, timing and
intensity of physical activity, and meal
choices pre- and post-fast should be pro-
vided (176). Treatment pre- and post-fast
should be culturally sensitive and individ-
ualized (177). Speciﬁc recommendations
for diabetes management during Rama-
dan (175) and Yom Kippur (172) are
available.
diabetesjournals.org/care
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
S83
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Carbohydrates
Studies examining the optimal amount
of carbohydrate intake for people with
diabetes are inconclusive, although mon-
itoring carbohydrate intake is a key strat-
egy in reaching glucose goals in people
with type 1 and type 2 diabetes (178,
179).
For people with type 2 diabetes, low-
carbohydrate
and
very-low-carbohydrate
eatingpatternsinparticularhavebeenfound
toreduceA1Candtheneedforantihypergly-
cemic medications (139,180–184). System-
atic reviews and meta-analyses of RCTs
found carbohydrate-restricted eating pat-
terns, particularly those considered low
carbohydrate (<26% total energy), were ef-
fective in reducing A1C in the short term
(<6 months), with less difference in eating
patterns beyond 1 year (134,182,185–187).
Questions still remain about the optimal de-
gree of carbohydrate restriction and the
long-term effects of those meal patterns on
CVD. A systematic review and meta-analysis
of RCTs investigating the dose-dependent
effects of carbohydrate restriction found
each 10% decrease in carbohydrate intake
had reductions in levels of A1C, fasting
plasma glucose, body weight, lipids, and
systolic blood pressure at 6 months, but
favorable effects diminished and were not
maintained at follow-up or at greater than
12 months. This systematic review high-
lights the metabolic complexity of re-
sponse to dietary intervention in type 2
diabetes as well as the need to better un-
derstand longer-term sustainability and
results (188). Part of the challenge in
interpreting low-carbohydrate research
has been due to the wide range of deﬁni-
tions for a low-carbohydrate eating plan
(189,190). Weight reduction was also a
goal in many low-carbohydrate studies,
which further complicates evaluating
the distinct contribution of the eating
pattern (48,130,134,188). As studies on
low-carbohydrate eating plans generally
indicate challenges with long-term sus-
tainability (180), it is important to reas-
sess and individualize meal plan guidance
regularly for those interested in this ap-
proach. Health care professionals should
maintain consistent medical oversight and
recognize that insulin and other diabetes
medications may need to be adjusted to
prevent hypoglycemia, and blood pressure
will need to be monitored. In addition,
very-low-carbohydrate eating plans are
not currently recommended for individuals
who are pregnant or lactating, children,
people who have renal disease, or people
with or at risk for disordered eating, and
these plans should be used with caution
in those taking sodium–glucose cotrans-
porter 2 inhibitors because of the potential
riskof ketoacidosis (191–193).
Regardless of the amount of carbohy-
drate in the meal plan, focus should be
placed on high-quality, nutrient-dense car-
bohydrate sources that are high in ﬁber
and minimally processed. The addition of
dietary ﬁber modulates composition of
gut microbiota and increases gut microbial
diversity. Although there is still much to be
elucidated with the gut microbiome and
chronic disease, higher-ﬁber diets are ad-
vantageous (194). Both children and adults
with diabetes are encouraged to minimize
intake
of
reﬁned
carbohydrates
with
added sugars, fat, and sodium and instead
focus on carbohydrates from vegetables,
legumes, fruits, dairy (milk and yogurt),
and whole grains. People with diabetes
and those at risk for diabetes are encour-
aged to consume a minimum of 14 g of ﬁ-
ber/1,000 kcal, with at least half of grain
consumption being whole, intact grains,
according to the Dietary Guidelines for
Americans (98). Regular intake of sufﬁcient
dietary ﬁber is associated with lower all-
cause mortality in people with diabetes
(195,196), and prospective cohort studies
have found dietary ﬁber intake is inversely
associated with risk of type 2 diabetes
(197–199). The consumption of sugar-
sweetened beverages and processed food
products with large amounts of reﬁned
grains and added sugars is strongly dis-
couraged (98,200,201), as these have the
capacity to displace healthier, more nutri-
ent-dense food choices.
The literature concerning glycemic in-
dex and glycemic load in individuals with
diabetes is complex, often with varying
deﬁnitions of low- and high-glycemic-
index foods (202,203). The glycemic index
ranks carbohydrate foods on their post-
prandial glycemic response, and glycemic
load takes into account both the glycemic
index of foods and the amount of carbohy-
drate eaten. Studies have found mixed re-
sults regarding the effect of glycemic index
and glycemic load on fasting glucose levels
and A1C, with one systematic review ﬁnd-
ing no signiﬁcant impact on A1C (204)
while others demonstrated A1C reductions
of 0.15% (202) to 0.5% (190,205).
Individuals with type 1 or type 2 diabe-
tes taking insulin at mealtime should
be offered comprehensive and ongoing
education about nutrition content and the
need to couple insulin administration with
carbohydrate intake. For people whose
meal schedule or carbohydrate consump-
tion is variable, regular education to in-
crease understanding of the relationship
between carbohydrate intake and insulin
needs is important. In addition, education
on using insulin-to-carbohydrate ratios for
meal planning can assist individuals with
effectively modifying insulin dosing from
meal to meal to improve glycemic man-
agement (104,178,206–208). Studies have
shown that dietary fat and protein can im-
pact early and delayed postprandial glyce-
mia (209–212), and it appears to have a
dose-dependent response (213–216). Re-
sults from high-fat, high-protein meal stud-
ies highlight the need for additional insulin
to cover these meals; however, more stud-
ies are needed to determine the optimal
insulin dose and delivery strategy. The re-
sults from these studies also point to indi-
vidual differences in postprandial glycemic
response; therefore, a cautious approach
to increasing insulin doses for high-fat
and/or high-protein mixed meals is recom-
mended to address delayed hyperglycemia
that may occur after eating (73,217,218). If
using an insulin pump, a split bolus feature
(part of the bolus delivered immediately,
the remainder over a programmed dura-
tion of time) may provide better insulin
coverage for high-fat and/or high-protein
mixed meals (210,219).
The effectiveness of insulin dosing deci-
sions should be conﬁrmed with a structured
approach to blood glucose monitoring or
CGM to evaluate individual responses and
guide insulin dose adjustments. Checking
glucose 3 h after eating may help to deter-
mine if additional insulin adjustments are re-
quired (i.e., increasing or stopping bolus)
(210,219,220). Adjusting insulin doses to
account for high-fat and/or high-protein
meals requires determination of antici-
pated nutrient intake to calculate the
mealtime dose. Food literacy, numeracy,
interest, and capability should be evalu-
ated (73). For individuals on a ﬁxed daily
insulin schedule, meal planning should
emphasize a relatively ﬁxed carbohydrate
consumption pattern with respect to both
time and amount while considering insulin
action. Attention to resultant hunger and
satiety cues will also help with nutrient
modiﬁcations throughout the day (73,221).
Commercially available automated insulin
delivery systems still require basic diabetes
management skills, including carbohydrate
S84
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

counting and understanding of the impact
of protein and fat on postprandial glucose
response (222).
Protein
There is no evidence that adjusting the
daily level of protein intake (typically
1–1.5 g/kg body weight/day or 15–20%
of total calories) will improve health, and
research is inconclusive regarding the
ideal amount of dietary protein to opti-
mize either glycemic management or
CVD risk (203,223).Therefore, protein in-
take goals should be individualized based
on current eating patterns. Some re-
search has found successful manage-
ment of type 2 diabetes with meal plans
including slightly higher levels of protein
(20–30%), which may contribute to in-
creased satiety (224).
Historically, low-protein eating plans
were advised for individuals with diabetic
kidney disease (DKD) (with albuminuria
and/or reduced estimated glomerular ﬁl-
tration rate); however, current evidence
does not suggest that people with DKD
need to restrict protein to less than the
generally recommended protein intake
(73). Reducing the amount of dietary
protein below the recommended daily al-
lowance of 0.8 g/kg is not recommended
because it does not alter glycemic meas-
ures, cardiovascular risk measures, or the
rate at which glomerular ﬁltration rate de-
clines and may increase risk for malnutri-
tion (225–227).
Strong evidence suggests higher plant
protein intake and replacement of animal
protein with plant protein is associated
with lower risk of all-cause and cardiovas-
cular mortality in the Women’s Health Ini-
tiative cohort study (228). A meta-analysis
of 13 RCTs showed replacing animal with
plant proteins leads to small improve-
ments in A1C and fasting glucose in indi-
viduals with type 2 diabetes (229). Plant
proteins are lower in saturated fat and
support planetary health (230).
Fats
Evidence suggests that there is not an op-
timal percentage of calories from fat for
people with or at risk for diabetes and
that macronutrient distribution should be
individualized according to the individual’s
eating patterns, preferences, and meta-
bolic goals (73). The type of fats con-
sumed is more important than total
amount of fat when looking at metabolic
goals and CVD risk, and it is recom-
mended that the percentage of total calo-
ries from saturated fats should be limited
(98,129,231–233). Multiple RCTs including
people with type 2 diabetes have re-
ported that a Mediterranean eating pat-
tern (95,129,234–239) can improve both
glycemic management and blood lipids.
The Mediterranean eating pattern is
based on the traditional eating habits in
the countries bordering the Mediterra-
nean Sea. Although eating styles vary by
country or culture, they share a number
of common features, including consump-
tion of fresh fruits and vegetables, whole
grains, beans, and nuts/seeds; olive oil as
the primary fat source; low to moderate
amounts of ﬁsh, eggs, and poultry; and
limited added sugars, sugary beverages,
sodium, highly processed foods, reﬁned
carbohydrates, saturated fats, and fatty or
processed meats.
Evidence does not conclusively support
recommending
n-3
(eicosapentaenoic
acid and docosahexaenoic acid) supple-
ments for all people with diabetes for the
prevention or treatment of cardiovascular
events (73,240,241). In individuals with
type 2 diabetes, two systematic reviews
with n-3 and n-6 fatty acids concluded
that the dietary supplements did not im-
prove glycemic management (203,242). In
the ASCEND (A Study of Cardiovascular
Events iN Diabetes) trial, when compared
with placebo, supplementation with n-3
fatty acids at a dose of 1 g/day did not
lead to cardiovascular beneﬁt in people
with diabetes without evidence of CVD
(243). However, results from the Reduc-
tion of Cardiovascular Events With Icosa-
pent Ethyl-Intervention Trial (REDUCE-IT)
found that supplementation with 4 g/day
of pure eicosapentaenoic acid signiﬁcantly
lowered the risk of adverse cardiovascu-
lar events.This trial of 8,179 participants,
in which over 50% had diabetes, found a
5% absolute reduction in cardiovascular
events for individuals with established
atherosclerotic CVD taking a preexisting
statin with residual hypertriglyceridemia
(135–499 mg/dL [1.52–5.63 mmol/L])
(244). See Section 10, “Cardiovascular
Disease and Risk Management,” for
more information. People with diabetes
should be advised to follow the guide-
lines for the general population for the
recommended intakes of saturated fat,
dietary cholesterol, and trans fat (98).
Trans fats should be avoided. In addi-
tion, as saturated fats are progressively
decreased in the diet, they should be re-
placed with unsaturated fats and not
with reﬁned carbohydrates (238).
Sodium
As for the general population, people
with diabetes are advised to limit their
sodium consumption to <2,300 mg/day
(73). Restriction to <1,500 mg, even for
those with hypertension, is generally not
recommended (245–247). Sodium rec-
ommendations should take into account
palatability, availability, affordability, and
the difﬁculty of achieving low-sodium
recommendations in a nutritionally ade-
quate eating plan (248,249).
Micronutrients and Supplements
Despite lack of evidence of beneﬁt from di-
etary supplements, consumers continue
to take them. Estimates show that up to
59% of people with diabetes in the U.S.
use supplements (250). Without underly-
ing deﬁciency, there is no beneﬁt from
herbal or nonherbal (i.e., vitamin or min-
eral) supplementation for people with dia-
betes (73,251). Federal law in the U.S.
broadly deﬁnes dietary supplements as
having one or more dietary ingredients, in-
cluding vitamins, minerals, herbs or other
botanicals, amino acids, enzymes, tissues
from organs or glands, or extracts of these
(252).
Routine antioxidant supplementation
(such as vitamins E and C) is not recom-
mended due to lack of evidence of efﬁ-
cacy and concern related to long-term
safety. Based on the 2022 U.S. Preven-
tative Services Task Force statement,
the harms of b-carotene outweigh the
beneﬁts for the prevention of CVD or
cancer. b-Carotene was associated with
increased lung cancer and cardiovascu-
lar mortality risk (253).
In addition, there is insufﬁcient evidence
to support the routine use of herbal sup-
plements and micronutrients, such as cin-
namon (254), curcumin, vitamin D (255),
aloe vera, or chromium, to improve glyce-
mia in people with diabetes (73,256).
Although the Vitamin D and Type 2
Diabetes Study (D2d) prospective RCT and
Diabetes Prevention and Active Vitamin D
(DPVD) showed no signiﬁcant beneﬁt of vi-
tamin D versus placebo on the progression
to type 2 diabetes in individuals at high
risk (257,258), post hoc analyses and
meta-analyses suggest a potential beneﬁt
in speciﬁc populations (257,259–261).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
S85
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Further research is needed to deﬁne indi-
vidual characteristics and clinical indica-
tors where vitamin D supplementation
may be of beneﬁt.
Metformin is associated with vitamin
B12 deﬁciency per a report from the Dia-
betes Prevention Program Outcomes
Study (DPPOS), which suggests that peri-
odic testing of vitamin B12 levels should
be considered in people taking metfor-
min, particularly in those with anemia
or peripheral neuropathy (262,263) (see
Section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches
to Glycemic Treatment”). Consumers can
consult the U.S. Food and Drug Adminis-
tration (FDA) Dietary Supplement Ingredi-
ent Directory to locate information about
ingredients used in dietary supplements
and any action taken by the agency with
regard to that ingredient (264).
For special populations, including preg-
nant or lactating individuals, older adults,
vegetarians, and people following very-
low-calorie or low-carbohydrate diets, a
multivitamin may be necessary (265).
Alcohol
Moderate alcohol intake ingested with
food does not have major detrimental
effects on long-term blood glucose man-
agement in people with diabetes. Risks
associated
with
alcohol
consumption
include hypoglycemia and/or delayed hy-
poglycemia (particularly for those using in-
sulin or insulin secretagogue therapies),
weight gain, and hyperglycemia (for those
consuming excessive amounts) (73,256).
People with diabetes should be educated
about these risks and encouraged to mon-
itor glucose frequently after drinking alco-
hol to minimize such risks. People with
diabetes can follow the same guidelines as
those without diabetes consistent with Die-
tary Guidelines for Americans, 2020–2025
(98). The available evidence does not sup-
port recommending alcohol consumption
in people who do not currently drink (266).
To reduce risk of alcohol-related harms,
adults can choose not to drink or to drink
in moderation by limiting intake to #2
drinks a day for men or #1 drink a day for
women
(one
drink
is
equal
to
a
12-oz beer, a 5-oz glass of wine, or 1.5 oz
of distilled spirits) (266). There is growing
evidence for psychoeducational interven-
tions that may increase knowledge about
alcohol use and diabetes, may enhance
perceived risks, and may reduce alcohol
use among young people with type 1 dia-
betes (267).
Nonnutritive Sweeteners
The FDA has approved many nonnutritive
sweeteners (NNS) for consumption by the
general public, including people with dia-
betes (73,268). However, the safety and
role of NNS continue to be sources of con-
cern and confusion for the public (269).
This confusion has been heightened with
the World Health Organization’s condi-
tional recommendation (270) against NNS
for weight management, the Cleveland
Clinic study on erythritol and its relation-
ship to CVD (271), and the International
Agency for Research on Cancer classifying
aspartame as a possible carcinogen to hu-
mans (272). It should be noted the sys-
tematic analysis that informed the World
Health Organization recommendation ex-
cluded individuals with diabetes. In an edito-
rial from the Journal of Clinical Investigation,
Nobs and Elinav (273) from the Weizmann
Institute described the impact these recent
studies have had on the public perception
of safety of NNS: “The burden of proof has
shifted from a need to prove that NNS are
unsafe to a necessity of understanding their
potential scope of effects on humans in or-
der to optimize their recommended use by
populations at risk.”
Despite FDA approval and generally rec-
ognized as safe (GRAS) status for NNS, as
well as established acceptable daily intake
(ADI), questions remain. Implementation
and interpretation of human NNS studies
are inherently challenging. Each of the
sweeteners are their own distinct com-
pounds with different molecular struc-
tures, although they are often considered
together in studies. Issues of duration of
exposure (short or long), different physical
forms (packets/powder or in beverages),
cardiometabolic health of the host, per-
sonalized individual response, presence of
other nutrient components, the emerging
evidence about the microbiome, and lim-
ited RCTs complicate the science (273).
For some people with diabetes who are
accustomed to regularly consuming sugar-
sweetened products, NNS (containing few
or no calories) may be an acceptable sub-
stitute for nutritive sweeteners (those
containing calories, such as sugar, honey,
and agave syrup) when consumed in mod-
eration (274,275). NNS do not appear to
have a signiﬁcant effect on glycemic man-
agement (104,276,277), and they can
reduce overall calorie and carbohydrate
intake (104,274) as long as individuals are
not compensating with additional calories
from other food sources (73,278).There is
mixed evidence from systematic reviews
and meta-analyses for NNS use with re-
gard to weight management, with some
ﬁnding beneﬁt in weight loss (279–281)
while other research suggests an associa-
tion with weight gain (282,283). This may
be explained by reverse causality and resid-
ual confounding variables (283). The addi-
tion of NNS to eating plans poses no
beneﬁt for weight loss or reduced weight
gain without energy restriction (284). In a
recent systematic review and meta-analysis
using low-calorie and no-calorie sweetened
beverages as an intended substitute for
sugar-sweetened beverages, a small im-
provement in body weight and cardiome-
tabolic risk factors was seen without
evidence of harm and had a direction of
beneﬁt similar to that seen with water.
Health care professionals should continue
to recommend water, but people with
overweight or obesity and diabetes may
also have a variety of no-calorie or low-
calorie sweetened products so that they
do not feel deprived (285).
Health care professionals should con-
tinue to recommend reductions in sugar
intake and calories with or without the
use of NNS. Assuring people with diabe-
tes that NNS have undergone extensive
safety evaluation by regulatory agencies
and are continually monitored can allay
unnecessary concern for harm. Health
care professionals can regularly assess
individual use of NNS based on the ac-
ceptable daily intake (amount of a sub-
stance considered safe to consume each
day over a person’s life) and recommend
moderation. See the chart from the FDA
on safe levels of sweeteners found at
fda.gov/food/food-additives-petitions/
aspartame-and-other-sweeteners-food.
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
Recommendations
5.27 Counsel youth with type 1 dia-
betes C or type 2 diabetes B to engage
in 60 min/day or more of moderate- or
vigorous-intensity aerobic activity, with
vigorous muscle-strengthening and
bone-strengthening activities at least
3 days/week.
5.28 Counsel most adults with type 1
diabetes C and type 2 diabetes B to en-
gage in 150 min or more of moderate- to
S86
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

vigorous-intensity aerobic activity per
week, spread over at least 3 days/
week, with no more than 2 consecu-
tive days without activity. Shorter du-
rations (minimum 75 min/week) of
vigorous-intensity or interval training
may be sufﬁcient for younger and
more physically ﬁt individuals.
5.29 Counsel adults with type 1 diabe-
tes C and type 2 diabetes B to engage
in 2–3 sessions/week of resistance ex-
ercise on nonconsecutive days.
5.30 Recommend ﬂexibility training
and balance training 2–3 times/week
for older adults with diabetes.Yoga and
tai chi may be included based on indi-
vidual preferences to increase ﬂexibil-
ity, muscular strength, and balance. C
5.31 For all people with diabetes, eval-
uate baseline physical activity and time
spent in sedentary behavior (i.e., quiet
sitting, lying, and leaning). For people
who do not meet activity guidelines,
encourage increase in physical activities
(e.g., walking, yoga, housework, gar-
dening, swimming, and dancing) above
baseline (type 1 diabetes E and type 2
diabetes B). Counsel that prolonged
sitting should be interrupted every
30 min for blood glucose beneﬁts. C
Physical activity is a general term that in-
cludes all movement that increases en-
ergy use and is an important part of the
diabetes management plan. Exercise is a
more speciﬁc form of physical activity
that is structured and designed to im-
prove physical ﬁtness. Both physical activ-
ity and exercise are important. Exercise
has been shown to improve blood glu-
cose levels, reduce cardiovascular risk
factors, contribute to weight loss, and
improve well-being (286). Physical activ-
ity is as important for those with type 1
diabetes as it is for the general popula-
tion, but its speciﬁc role in the preven-
tion of diabetes complications and the
management of blood glucose is not as
clear as it is for those with type 2 diabe-
tes. Many individuals with type 2 diabetes
do not meet the recommended exercise
level per week (150 min). Objective mea-
surement by accelerometer in 871 indi-
viduals with type 2 diabetes showed that
44.2%, 42.6%, and 65.1% of White, African
American, and Hispanic individuals, respec-
tively, met the recommended threshold of
exercise (287). An RCT in 1,366 individuals
with prediabetes combined a physical
activity intervention with text messaging
and telephone support, which showed
improvement in daily step count at
12 months compared with the control
group. Unfortunately, this was not sus-
tained at 48 months (288). Another RCT,
including 324 individuals with prediabe-
tes, showed increased physical activity at
8 weeks with supportive text messages,
but by 12 weeks there was no difference
between groups (289). It is important for
diabetes care management teams to un-
derstand the difﬁculty that many people
have reaching recommended treatment
goals and to identify individualized ap-
proaches to improve goal achievement,
which may need to change over time.
Moderate to high volumes of aerobic
activity are associated with substantially
lower cardiovascular and overall mortality
risks in both type 1 and type 2 diabetes
(290). A prospective observational study
of adults with type 1 diabetes suggested
that higher amounts of physical activity
led to reduced cardiovascular mortality
after a mean follow-up time of 11.4 years
for people with and without chronic kid-
ney disease (291). Additionally, structured
exercise interventions of at least 8 weeks’
duration have been shown to lower A1C
by an average of 0.66% in people with
type 2 diabetes, even without a signiﬁ-
cant change in BMI (292). There are also
considerable data for the health beneﬁts
(e.g., increased cardiovascular ﬁtness,
greater muscle strength, improved insulin
sensitivity) of regular exercise for those
with type 1 diabetes (293). Exercise train-
ing in type 1 diabetes may also improve
several important markers such as triglyc-
eride level, LDL cholesterol, waist circum-
ference, and body mass (294). In adults
with type 2 diabetes, higher levels of exer-
cise intensity are associated with greater
improvements in A1C and in cardiorespira-
tory ﬁtness (295); sustained improvements
in cardiorespiratory ﬁtness and weight loss
have also been associated with a lower risk
of heart failure (258). Other beneﬁts in-
clude slowing the decline in mobility among
overweight people with diabetes (296).The
ADA position statement “Physical Activity/
Exercise and Diabetes” reviews the evi-
dence for the beneﬁts of exercise in people
with type 1 and type 2 diabetes and offers
speciﬁc recommendations (297). Increased
physical activity (soccer training) has also
been shown to be beneﬁcial for improving
overall ﬁtness in Latino men with obesity,
demonstrating feasible methods to increase
physical activity in this population (298).
Physical activity and exercise should be rec-
ommended and prescribed to all individuals
who are at risk for or with diabetes as part
of management of glycemia and overall
health. Speciﬁc recommendations and pre-
cautions will vary by the type of diabetes,
age, activity, and presence of diabetes-
related health complications. Recommen-
dations should be tailored to meet the spe-
ciﬁc needs of each individual (297).
Exercise and Youth
Youth with diabetes or prediabetes should
be encouraged to engage in regular physi-
cal activity, including at least 60 min of
moderate to vigorous aerobic activity every
day and muscle- and bone-strengthening
activities at least 3 days per week (299). In
general, youth with type 1 diabetes beneﬁt
from being physically active, and meta-
analyses have demonstrated a signiﬁcant
association between physical activity and
lower A1C (300). Thus, an active lifestyle
should be recommended to all (301).Youth
with type 1 diabetes who engage in more
physical activity may have better health
outcomes and health-related quality of life
(302,303). See Section 14, “Children and
Adolescents,” for details.
Frequency and Type of Physical
Activity
For all people with diabetes, evaluate
baseline physical activity and time spent
in sedentary behavior (quiet sitting, lying,
and leaning). For people who do not
meet activity guidelines, encourage an in-
crease in physical activity (walking, yoga,
housework, gardening, swimming, and
dancing) above baseline (304). Health
care professionals should counsel people
with diabetes to engage in aerobic and re-
sistance exercise regularly (240). Aerobic
activity bouts should last at least 10 min,
with the goal of 30 min/day or more
most days of the week for adults with
type 2 diabetes. Daily exercise, or at least
not allowing more than 2 days to elapse
between exercise sessions, is recom-
mended to decrease insulin resistance,
regardless of diabetes type (305,306). A
study in adults with type 1 diabetes found a
dose-response inverse relationship between
self-reported bouts of physical activity per
week and A1C, BMI, hypertension, dyslipi-
demia, and diabetes-related complications
such as hypoglycemia, diabetic ketoacidosis,
retinopathy, and microalbuminuria (307).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
S87
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Over time, activities should progress in in-
tensity, frequency, and/or duration to at
least 150 min/week of moderate-intensity
exercise. Adults able to run at 6 miles/h
(9.7 km/h) for at least 25 min can beneﬁt
sufﬁciently from shorter durations of vigor-
ous-intensity activity or interval training
(75 min/week) (297). Many adults, including
most with type 2 diabetes, may be unable
or unwilling to participate in such intense
exercise and should engage in moderate
exercise for the recommended duration.
Adults with diabetes are encouraged to
engage in 2–3 sessions/week of resis-
tance exercise on nonconsecutive days
(308). Although heavier resistance training
with free weights or weight machines
may improve glycemia and strength (309),
resistance training of any intensity is rec-
ommended to improve strength, balance,
and the ability to engage in activities of
daily living throughout the life span.
Health care professionals should support
people with diabetes to set stepwise goals
toward meeting the recommended exer-
cise goals. As individuals intensify their ex-
ercise program, medical monitoring may
be indicated to ensure safety and evalu-
ate the effects on glucose management.
(See PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND GLYCEMIC MANAGEMENT,
below.)
Evidence supports that all individuals,
including those with diabetes, should be
encouraged to reduce the amount of time
spent being sedentary—waking behaviors
with low energy expenditure (e.g., seated
work at a computer or watching televi-
sion)—by breaking up bouts of sedentary
activity (>30 min) by brieﬂy standing,
walking, or performing other light physical
activities (310,311). Participating in leisure-
time activity and avoiding extended seden-
tary periods may help prevent type 2 dia-
betes for those at risk and may also aid in
glycemic management for those with dia-
betes (312,313).
A systematic review and meta-analysis
found higher frequency of regular lei-
sure-time physical activity was more ef-
fective in reducing A1C levels (314). A
wide range of activities, including yoga,
tai chi, and other types, can have signiﬁ-
cant impacts on A1C, ﬂexibility, muscle
strength, and balance (286,315–317).
Flexibility and balance exercises may be
particularly important in older adults with
diabetes to maintain range of motion,
strength, and balance (297) (Fig. 5.1).
There is strong evidence that exercise inter-
ventions in individuals with type 2 diabetes
improve depression, A1C, and overall psy-
chosocial well-being (318).
Physical Activity and Glycemic
Management
Clinical trials have provided strong evi-
dence for the A1C-lowering value of resis-
tance training in older adults with type 2
diabetes (297) and for an additive beneﬁt
of combined aerobic and resistance exer-
cise in adults with type 2 diabetes (319).
If not contraindicated, people with type 2
diabetes should be encouraged to do at
least two weekly sessions of resistance
exercise (free weights, machines, elastic
bands, or body weight as resistance), with
each session consisting of at least one set
(group of consecutive repetitive exercise
motions) of ﬁve or more different resis-
tance exercises involving the large muscle
groups (320).
For people with type 1 diabetes, al-
though exercise, in general, is associated
with improvement in disease status, care
needs to be taken in titrating exercise with
respect to glycemic management. Each in-
dividual with type 1 diabetes has a variable
glycemic response to exercise.This variabil-
ity should be taken into consideration
when recommending the type and dura-
tion of exercise for a given individual (293).
Individuals of childbearing potential with
preexisting diabetes, particularly type 2 dia-
betes, and those at risk for or presenting
with gestational diabetes mellitus should
be advised to engage in regular moderate
physical activity prior to and during their
pregnancies as tolerated (297).
High-Intensity Interval Training
High-intensity interval training (HIIT) is a
plan that involves aerobic training done be-
tween 65% and 90% VO2peak or 75% and
95% heart rate peak for 10 s to 4 min with
12 s to 5 min of active or passive recovery.
HIIT has gained attention as a potentially
time-efﬁcient modality that can elicit signif-
icant physiological and metabolic adapta-
tions for individuals with type 1 and type 2
diabetes (321,322). Higher intensities of
aerobic training are generally considered
superior to low-intensity training (323).
HIIT showed reductions in A1C and BMI
and improvement in ﬁtness levels in indi-
viduals with type 2 diabetes. Because HIIT
can lead to transient increases in post-
exercise hyperglycemia, individuals with
type 2 diabetes are encouraged to moni-
tor blood glucose when starting (320). In
type 1 diabetes, HIIT is associated with
reductions in A1C levels, reduction in in-
sulin requirements, and improvement in
cardiometabolic risk proﬁles (322). Vari-
ability in glucose may occur with an in-
creased risk in delayed hypoglycemia, so
careful monitoring of glucose during and
after HIIT is advised (322).
Pre-exercise Evaluation
As discussed more fully in Section 10,
“Cardiovascular
Disease
and
Risk
Management,” the best protocol for
assessing asymptomatic people with
diabetes for coronary artery disease
remains unclear. The ADA consensus re-
port “Screening for Coronary Artery Dis-
ease in Patients With Diabetes” (324)
concluded that routine testing is not rec-
ommended. However, health care profes-
sionals should perform a careful history,
assess cardiovascular risk factors, and be
aware of the atypical presentation of cor-
onary artery disease, such as recent re-
ported or tested decrease in exercise
tolerance in people with diabetes. Cer-
tainly, those with high risk should be en-
couraged to start with short periods of
low-intensity exercise and slowly increase
the duration and intensity as tolerated.
Health care professionals should assess
for conditions that might contraindicate
certain types of exercise or predispose to
injury, such as uncontrolled hypertension,
untreated proliferative retinopathy, au-
tonomic neuropathy, peripheral neuropa-
thy, balance impairment, and a history of
foot ulcers or Charcot foot. Age and previ-
ous physical activity level should be con-
sidered when customizing the exercise
plan to the individual’s needs. Those with
complications may need a more thorough
evaluation prior to starting an exercise
program (293).
Hypoglycemia
In individuals taking insulin and/or insu-
lin secretagogues, physical activity may
cause hypoglycemia if the medication
dose or carbohydrate consumption is
not adjusted for the exercise bout and
post-bout impact on glucose. Individuals
on these therapies may need to ingest
some added carbohydrate if pre-exercise glu-
cose levels are <90 mg/dL (<5.0 mmol/L),
depending on whether they are able to
lower insulin doses during the workout
(such as with an insulin pump or reduced
pre-exercise insulin dosage), the time of
day exercise is done, and the intensity
S88
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

and duration of the activity (293). In
some people with diabetes, hypoglycemia
after exercise may occur and last for sev-
eral hours due to increased insulin
sensitivity. Hypoglycemia is less common
in those who are not treated with insulin
or insulin secretagogues, and no routine
preventive measures for hypoglycemia
are usually advised in these cases. Intense
activities may actually raise blood glucose
levels instead of lowering them, especially
if pre-exercise glucose levels are elevated
Figure 5.1—Importance of 24-h physical behaviors for type 2 diabetes. Reprinted from Davies et al. (97).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
S89
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

(293). Because of the variation in glycemic
response to exercise bouts, people with dia-
betes need to be educated to check blood
glucose levels or consult sensor glucose val-
ues before and after periods of exercise and
about the potential prolonged effects (de-
pending on intensity and duration) (325).
Exercise in the Presence of
Microvascular Complications
See Section 11, “Chronic Kidney Disease
and Risk Management,” and Section 12,
“Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care,”
for more information on these long-term
complications. A meta-analysis on this topic
demonstrated moderate certainty of evi-
dencethat highversus low levels of physical
activity were associated with lower CVD in-
cidence and mortality (summary risk ratio
0.84 [95% CI 0.77–0.92], n = 7, and 0.62
[0.55–0.69], n = 11) and fewer microvascu-
lar complications (0.76 [0.67–0.86], n = 8).
Dose-response meta-analyses showed that
physical activity was associated with lower
risk of diabetes-related complications even
at lower levels (326).
Retinopathy
If proliferative diabetic retinopathy or se-
vere nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy
is present, then vigorous-intensity aerobic
or resistance exercise may be contraindi-
cated because of the risk of triggering vit-
reous hemorrhage or retinal detachment
(327). Consultation with an ophthalmolo-
gist prior to engaging in an intense exer-
cise plan may be appropriate.
Peripheral Neuropathy
Decreased pain sensation and a higher
pain threshold in the extremities can re-
sult in an increased risk of skin breakdown,
infection, and Charcot joint destruction
with some forms of exercise. Therefore, a
thorough assessment should be done to
ensure that neuropathy does not alter kin-
esthetic or proprioceptive sensation dur-
ing physical activity, particularly in those
with more severe neuropathy. Studies
have shown that moderate-intensity walk-
ing may not lead to an increased risk of
foot ulcers or reulceration in those with
peripheral neuropathy who use proper
footwear (328). In addition, 150 min/
week of moderate exercise was reported
to improve outcomes in people with pre-
diabetic neuropathy (329). All individuals
with peripheral neuropathy should wear
proper footwear and examine their feet
daily to detect lesions early. Anyone with
a foot injury or open sore should be re-
stricted to non–weight-bearing activities.
Autonomic Neuropathy
Autonomic neuropathy can increase the
risk of exercise-induced injury or adverse
events through decreased cardiac respon-
siveness to exercise, postural hypotension,
impaired thermoregulation, impaired night
vision due to impaired papillary reaction,
and greater susceptibility to hypoglycemia
(330). Cardiovascular autonomic neuropa-
thy is also an independent risk factor for
cardiovascular death and silent myocardial
ischemia (331). Therefore, individuals with
diabetic autonomic neuropathy should un-
dergo cardiac investigation before begin-
ning physical activity more intense than
that to which they are accustomed.
Diabetic Kidney Disease
Physical activity can acutely increase uri-
nary albumin excretion. However, there
is no evidence that vigorous-intensity ex-
ercise accelerates the rate of progression
of DKD, and there appears to be no need
for speciﬁc exercise restrictions for peo-
ple with DKD in general (327).
SMOKING CESSATION: TOBACCO,
E-CIGARETTES, AND CANNABIS
Recommendations
5.32 Advise all people with diabetes
not to use cigarettes and other to-
bacco products or e-cigarettes. A
5.33 As a routine component of dia-
betes care and education, ask people
with diabetes about the use of ciga-
rettes or other tobacco products. Af-
ter identiﬁcation of use, recommend
and refer for combination treatment
consisting of both tobacco/smoking
cessation counseling and pharmaco-
logical therapy. A
A causal link between cigarette smoking
and diabetes has been established and re-
ported on by the Surgeon General for
over a decade (332). Results from epide-
miologic, case-control, and cohort studies
provide convincing evidence to support
the causal link between cigarette smoking
and multiple health risks that can have a
profound impact on morbidity and mortal-
ity for people with diabetes (332). People
with diabetes who smoke and are exposed
to second-hand smoke have a heightened
risk of macrovascular complications (e.g.,
cardiovascular and peripheral vascular dis-
ease), microvascular complications (e.g.,
kidney disease and visual impairment),
worse glycemic outcomes, and premature
death compared with those who do not
smoke (333–336). Emerging data suggest
smoking has a role in the development of
type 2 diabetes, and quitting has been
shown to signiﬁcantly decrease this risk
over time (337–340).
The routine (every visit with every per-
son), thorough assessment of all types of
tobacco use is essential to prevent to-
bacco product initiation and promote ces-
sation. Evidence demonstrates signiﬁcant
beneﬁts to quitting smoking for all people,
resulting in a reduction and even reversal
of adverse health effects in addition to
an increase in life expectancy by as much
as a decade (341). However, data show to-
bacco use prevalence among adults with
chronic conditions has remained persis-
tently higher than that in the general popu-
lation (342), with recent declines in smoking
in middle-aged people with diabetes but
not in adolescents and young adults (342).
Numerous large RCTs have demonstrated
the efﬁcacy and cost-effectiveness of both
intensive and brief counseling in smoking
cessation, including the use of telephone
quit lines and web-based interventions, in
reducing tobacco use and maintaining absti-
nence from smoking (341,343,344). Current
recommendations include both counseling
and pharmacologic therapy to assist with
smoking cessation in nonpregnant adults
(345); however, more than two-thirds of
people trying to quit do not receive treat-
ment following evidence-based guidelines
(341).
Weight gain after smoking cessation has
been a concern related to diabetes man-
agement and risk for new onset of disease
(346). While post-cessation weight gain is
an identiﬁed issue, studies have found that
an average weight gain of 3–5 kg does not
necessarily persist long term or diminish
the substantial cardiovascular beneﬁt real-
ized from smoking cessation (337). These
ﬁndings highlight the need for tobacco
cessation treatment that addresses eating
and physical activity needs. One study in
people with newly diagnosed type 2 diabe-
tes who smoke found that smoking cessa-
tion was associated with amelioration of
microalbuminuria and reduction in blood
pressure after 1 year (347).
In recent years, there has been an in-
crease in the use and availability of mul-
tiple noncigarette nicotine products. The
S90
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

evidence regarding the effect of these
products on diabetes is not as clear
as that for combustible cigarettes. It is
known that smokeless tobacco products,
such as dip and chew, pose an increased
risk for CVD (348). E-cigarettes and vap-
ing have gained public awareness and
popularity because of perceptions that
e-cigarette use is less harmful than regular
cigarette smoking (349,350). While com-
bustible tobacco products are clearly the
most harmful, electronic products should
not be characterized as harmless, as health
risks with use that affect the cardiovascu-
lar and respiratory systems have been
identiﬁed (351,352). Individuals with di-
abetes should be advised to avoid vap-
ing and using e-cigarettes, either as a
way to stop smoking combustible ciga-
rettes or as a recreational drug. If peo-
ple are using e-cigarettes to quit, they
should be advised to avoid using both
combustible and electronic cigarettes,
and if using only e-cigarettes, they should
be advised to have a plan to quit these
also (344).
Increased legalization and multiple for-
mulations of cannabis products have re-
sulted in increased prevalence in the use
of these products in all age-groups (353,
354). Signiﬁcant increases in tetrahydro-
cannabinol (THC) concentrations and use
of additional psychoactive cannabinoid
products, such as delta-8 THC, are of spe-
ciﬁc concern (355). Most of these prod-
ucts are currently unregulated by the
FDA, and public health warnings regard-
ing use have been issued (356). The FDA
reports adverse effects related to delta-
8 THC, some of which may have health
implications for people with diabetes
(e.g., vomiting) (356). Evidence of spe-
ciﬁc increased risk of diabetic ketoacido-
sis and hyperglycemic ketosis associated
with cannabis use and cannabis hyper-
emesis syndrome in adults with type 1
diabetes has been recently reported
(357–359).
Diabetes education programs offer po-
tential to systematically reach and engage
individuals with diabetes in smoking ces-
sation efforts. A cluster randomized trial
found statistically signiﬁcant increases in
quit rates and long-term abstinence rates
(>6 months) when smoking cessation
interventions were offered through dia-
betes education clinics, regardless of mo-
tivation to quit at baseline (360). The
increased prevalence in use of an ex-
panding landscape of both tobacco and
cannabis products and the impact on the
health of people with diabetes highlights
the need to ask about use of these prod-
ucts, educate individuals regarding the
associated risks, and provide support for
cessation.
SUPPORTING POSITIVE HEALTH
BEHAVIORS
Recommendation
5.34 Behavioral strategies should
be used to support diabetes self-
management and engagement in health
behaviors (e.g., taking medications, us-
ing diabetes technologies, and engaging
in physical activity and healthy eating)
to promote optimal diabetes health out-
comes. A
Given associations with glycemic outcomes
and risk for future complications (361,362),
it is important for diabetes care professio-
nals to support people with diabetes
to engage in health-promoting behaviors
(preventive, treatment, and maintenance),
including blood glucose monitoring, taking
insulin and medications, using diabetes
technologies, engaging in physical activity,
and making nutritional changes. Evidence
supports using a variety of behavioral strat-
egies and multicomponent interventions to
help people with diabetes and their care-
givers or family members develop health
behavior routines and overcome barriers
to self-management behaviors (363–365).
Behavioral strategies with empirical sup-
port include motivational interviewing
(366–368), patient activation (369), goal
setting and action planning (368,370–372),
problem-solving (371,373), tracking or self-
monitoring health behaviors with or
without feedback from a health care pro-
fessional (368,370–372), and facilitating
opportunities for social support (368,
371,372). There is mixed evidence about
behavioral economics strategies (e.g., ﬁ-
nancial incentives and exposure to infor-
mation about social norms) to promote
engagement in health behaviors among
people with diabetes; such strategies
tend to enhance intentions and demon-
strate short-term beneﬁts for behavior
change, although there is less evidence
about sustained effects (374). Multicom-
ponent behavior change intervention
packages have the highest efﬁcacy for
behavioral
and
glycemic
outcomes
(363,372,375). For youth with diabetes,
family-based behavioral intervention
packages and multisystem interventions
that facilitate health behavior change
demonstrate beneﬁt for increasing man-
agement behaviors and improving glyce-
mic outcomes (364). As with all diabetes
health care, it is important to adapt and
tailor behavior change strategies to the
characteristics and needs of the individual
and population (376–378). Health behavior
change strategies may be delivered by be-
havioral health professionals, DCES, other
trained health care professionals (370,
379–381), or qualiﬁed community health
workers (370,371). These approaches may
be delivered via digital health tools (372,
380,382). There are effective strategies to
train diabetes care professionals to use
such methods (e.g., motivational inter-
viewing) (383).
PSYCHOSOCIAL CARE
Recommendations
5.35 Psychosocial care should be pro-
vided to all people with diabetes, with
the goal of optimizing health-related
quality of life and health outcomes.
Such care should be integrated with
routine medical care and delivered by
trained health care professionals using
a collaborative, person-centered, cul-
turally informed approach. A
5.36 Diabetes care teams should im-
plement psychosocial screening proto-
cols for general and diabetes-related
mood concerns as well as other topics
such as stress, quality of life, available
resources (ﬁnancial, social, family, and
emotional), and/or psychiatric history.
Screening should occur at least annually
or when there is a change in disease,
treatment, or life circumstances. C
5.37 When indicated, refer to behav-
ioral health professionals or other
trained health care professionals, ide-
ally those with experience in diabetes,
for further assessment and treatment
for symptoms of diabetes distress,
depression, suicidality, anxiety, treat-
ment-related fear of hypoglycemia,
disordered eating, and/or cognitive ca-
pacities. Such specialized psychosocial
care should use age-appropriate stan-
dardized and validated tools and treat-
ment approaches. B
5.38 Consider developmental factors
and use age-appropriate validated tools
for psychosocial screening in people
with diabetes. E
diabetesjournals.org/care
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
S91
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Please refer to the ADA position state-
ment “Psychosocial Care for People With
Diabetes” for a list of assessment tools
and additional details (1) and the ADA Be-
havioral Health Toolkit for assessment
questionnaires and surveys (professional
.diabetes.org/meetings/behavioral-health-
toolkit).Throughout the Standards of Care,
the broad term “behavioral health” is
used to encompass both 1) health behav-
ior engagement and relevant factors and
2) behavioral health concerns and care re-
lated to living with diabetes.
Complex environmental, social, family,
behavioral, and emotional factors, known
as psychosocial factors, inﬂuence living
with type 1 and type 2 diabetes and
achieving optimal health outcomes and
psychological well-being. Thus, individuals
with diabetes and their families are chal-
lenged with complex, multifaceted issues
when integrating diabetes care into daily
life (384). Clinically signiﬁcant behavioral
health diagnoses are considerably more
prevalent in people with diabetes than in
those without (385–387). Emotional well-
being is an important part of diabetes
care and self-management. Psychological
and social problems can impair the indi-
vidual’s (57,388–392) or family’s (391)
ability to carry out diabetes care tasks
and potentially compromise health sta-
tus. Therefore, psychological symptoms,
both clinical and subclinical, must be ad-
dressed. In addition to impacting a per-
son’s ability to carry out self-management
and the association of behavioral health
diagnoses with poorer short-term glyce-
mic stability, symptoms of emotional
distress are associated with increased
mortality risk (386,393).
There are opportunities for diabetes
health care professionals to routinely mon-
itor and screen psychosocial status in a
timely and efﬁcient manner for referral to
appropriate services (394,395). Various
health care professionals working with
people with diabetes may contribute to
psychosocial care in different ways based
on training, experience, need, and avail-
ability (380,396,397). Ideally, qualiﬁed
behavioral health professionals with spe-
cialized training and experience in diabetes
should be integrated with or provide collab-
orative care as part of diabetes care teams
(398–401). Referrals for in-depth assess-
ment and treatment for psychosocial con-
cerns should be made to such behavioral
health professionals when indicated (381,
402,403). A systematic review and meta-
analysis showed that psychosocial interven-
tions modestly but signiﬁcantly improved
A1C and behavioral health outcomes (404).
There was a limited association between
the effects on A1C and behavioral health,
and no intervention characteristics pre-
dicted beneﬁt on both outcomes. However,
cost analyses have shown that behavioral
health interventions are both effective and
cost-efﬁcient approaches to the prevention
of diabetes (405).
Screening
Health care teams should develop and im-
plement psychosocial screening protocols
to ensure routine monitoring of psychoso-
cial well-being and to identify potential
concerns among people with diabetes,
following published guidance and recom-
mendations (406–411). Topics to screen
for may include, but are not limited to, at-
titudes about diabetes, expectations for
treatment and outcomes (especially re-
lated to starting a new treatment or tech-
nology),
general
and
diabetes-related
mood, stress, and/or quality of life (e.g.,
diabetes distress, depressive symptoms,
anxiety symptoms, and/or fear of hypo-
glycemia), available resources (ﬁnancial,
social, family, and emotional), and/or psy-
chiatric history. Given elevated rates of
suicidality among people with diabetes
(412–415), screening for suicidality may
also be appropriate (416–418), similar to
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force state-
ments regarding screening for some adoles-
cents and adults in the general population
(419,420). A list of age-appropriate screen-
ing and evaluation measures is provided in
the ADA position statement “Psychosocial
Care for People with Diabetes” (1), and
guidance has been published about selec-
tion of screening tools, clinical thresholds,
and frequency of screening (408,421). Key
opportunities for psychosocial screening
occur at diabetes diagnosis, during regularly
scheduled management visits, during
hospitalizations, with new onset of com-
plications, during signiﬁcant transitions in
care such as from pediatric to adult care
teams (422), at the time of medical treat-
ment changes, or when problems with
achieving A1C goals, quality of life, or self-
management are identiﬁed. People with
diabetes are likely to exhibit psychological
vulnerability at diagnosis, when their
medical status changes (e.g., end of the
honeymoon period), when the need for
intensiﬁed treatment is evident, and when
complications are discovered. Signiﬁcant
changes in life circumstances and SDOH
are known to considerably affect a per-
son’s ability to self-manage their condition.
Thus, screening for SDOH (e.g., loss of
employment, birth of a child, or other
family-based stresses) should also be incor-
porated into routine care (423). In cir-cum-
stances where individuals other than the
person with diabetes are signiﬁcantly in-
volved in diabetes management (e.g., care-
givers or family members), these issues
should be monitored and treated by ap-
propriate professionals (422,424,425).
Standardized, validated, age-appropri-
ate tools for psychosocial monitoring
and screening can also be used (1). The
ADA provides access to tools for screen-
ing speciﬁc psychosocial topics, such as
diabetes distress, fear of hypoglycemia,
and other relevant psychological symp-
toms at professional.diabetes.org/sites/
default/ﬁles/media/ada_mental_health_
toolkit_questionnaires.pdf. Additional in-
formation about developmentally spe-
ciﬁc psychosocial screening topics is
available in Section 14, “Children and
Adolescents,” and Section 13, “Older
Adults.” Health care professionals may
also use informal verbal inquires, for
example, by asking whether there have
been persistent changes in mood during
the past 2 weeks or since the individual’s
last appointment and whether the person
can identify a triggering event or change in
circumstances. Diabetes care professionals
should also ask whether there are new or
different barriers to treatment and self-
management, such as feeling overwhelmed
or stressed by having diabetes (see DIABETES
DISTRESS, below), changes in ﬁnances, or com-
peting medical demands (e.g., the diagnosis
of a comorbid condition).
Psychological Assessment and
Treatment
When psychosocial concerns are identi-
ﬁed, referral to a qualiﬁed behavioral
health professional, ideally one specializing
in diabetes, should be made for compre-
hensive evaluation, diagnosis, and treat-
ment (380,381,402,403). Indications for
referral may include positive screening for
overall stress related to work-life balance,
diabetes distress, diabetes management
difﬁculties, depression, anxiety, disordered
eating, and cognitive dysfunction (see
Table 5.2 for a complete list). It is prefera-
ble to incorporate psychosocial assessment
S92
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

and treatment into routine care rather
than waiting for a speciﬁc problem or de-
terioration in metabolic or psychological
status to occur (39,391). Health care pro-
fessionals should identify behavioral health
professionals, knowledgeable about diabe-
tes treatment and the psychosocial as-
pects of diabetes, to whom they can refer
individuals. The ADA provides a list of be-
havioral health professionals who have
specialized expertise or who have received
education about psychosocial and behav-
ioral issues related to diabetes in the ADA
Mental Health Professional Directory
(professional.diabetes.org/ada-mental
-health-provider-directory). Ideally, be-
havioral health professionals should be
embedded in diabetes care settings. In
recognition of limited behavioral health
resources and to optimize availability,
other health care professionals who
have been trained in behavioral health in-
terventions may also provide this special-
ized psychosocial care (396,399,426,427).
Although some health care professionals
may not feel qualiﬁed to treat psychologi-
cal problems (428), strengthening the
relationship between a person with dia-
betes and the health care professional
may increase the likelihood of the individ-
ual accepting referral for other services.
Collaborative care interventions and a
team approach have demonstrated efﬁ-
cacy in diabetes self-management, out-
comes of depression, and psychosocial
functioning (5,6). The ADA provides re-
sources for a range of health professio-
nals to support behavioral health in
people with diabetes at professional
.diabetes.org/meetings/behavioral-health
-toolkit.
Evidence supports interventions for
people with diabetes and psychosocial
concerns, including issues that affect
behavioral health. Successful therapeutic
approaches include cognitive behavioral
(400,402,429,430) and mindfulness-based
therapies (427,431,432). See the sections
below for details about interventions for
speciﬁc psychological concerns. Behav-
ioral interventions may also be indicated
in a preventive manner even in the ab-
sence of positive psychosocial screeners,
such as resilience-promoting interventions
to prevent diabetes distress in adoles-
cence (433,434) and behavioral family
interventions to promote collaborative fam-
ily diabetes management in early adoles-
cence (435,436) or to support adjustment
to a new treatment plan or technology
(65). Psychosocial interventions can be de-
livered via digital health platforms (437).
Group-based or shared diabetes appoint-
ments that address both medical and psy-
chosocial issues relevant to living with
diabetes are a promising model to consider
(397,438).
Although efﬁcacy has been demon-
strated with psychosocial interventions,
there has been varying success regarding
sustainedincreasesinengagementinhealth
behaviors and improved glycemic outcomes
associated with behavioral health issues.
Thus, health care professionals should
systematically monitor these outcomes
following implementation of current ev-
idence-based psychosocial treatments
to determine ongoing needs.
Diabetes Distress
Recommendation
5.39 Screen people with diabetes, care-
givers, and family members for diabetes
distress at least annually, and consider
more frequent monitoring when treat-
ment targets are not met, at transi-
tional times, and/or in the presence of
diabetes complications. Health care
professionals can address diabetes dis-
tress and may consider referral to a
qualiﬁed behavioral health professional,
ideally one with experience in diabetes,
for further assessment and treatment if
indicated. B
Diabetes distress is very common (391,
439–441). While it shares some features
with depression, diabetes distress is dis-
tinct and has unique relationships with
glycemic and other outcomes (440,442).
Diabetes distress refers to signiﬁcant
negative psychological reactions related
to emotional burdens and worries speciﬁc
to an individual’s experience in having to
manage a severe, complicated, and de-
manding chronic condition such as diabetes
(439,440,443). The constant behavioral
demands of diabetes self-management
(medication dosing,
frequency, and
titration as well as monitoring of glu-
cose, food intake, eating patterns, and
physical activity) and the potential or
actuality of disease progression are di-
rectly associated with reports of diabe-
tes distress (439). The prevalence of
diabetes
distress
is
reported
to
be
18–45%, with an incidence of 38–48%
over 18 months in people with type 2
diabetes (443). In the second Diabetes
Attitudes, Wishes, and Needs (DAWN2)
study, signiﬁcant diabetes distress was re-
ported by 45% of the participants, but
only 24% reported that their health care
teams asked them how diabetes affected
their lives (391). Similar rates have been
identiﬁed among adolescents with type 1
diabetes (441) and in parents of youth
with type 1 diabetes. High levels of diabe-
tes distress signiﬁcantly impact medication-
taking behaviors and are linked to higher
A1C, lower self-efﬁcacy, and less optimal
Table 5.2—Situations that warrant referral of a person with diabetes to a qualiﬁed behavioral health professional for
evaluation and treatment
 A positive screen on a validated screening tool for depressive symptoms, diabetes distress, anxiety, fear of hypoglycemia, suicidality, or
cognitive impairment
 The presence of symptoms or suspicions of disordered eating behavior, an eating disorder, or disrupted patterns of eating
 Intentional omission of insulin or oral medication to cause weight loss is identiﬁed
 A serious mental illness is suspected
 In youth and families with behavioral self-care difﬁculties, repeated hospitalizations for diabetic ketoacidosis, failure to achieve expected
developmental milestones, or signiﬁcant distress
 Low engagement in diabetes self-management behaviors, including declining or impaired ability to perform diabetes self-management behaviors
 Before undergoing bariatric or metabolic surgery and after surgery, if assessment reveals an ongoing need for adjustment support
diabetesjournals.org/care
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
S93
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

eating and exercise behaviors (5,439,443).
Diabetes distress is also associated with
symptoms of anxiety, depression, and re-
duced health-related quality of life (444).
Diabetes distress should be routinely
monitored (445) using diabetes-speciﬁc
validated measures (1), such as those
available through the ADA’s website
(professional.diabetes.org/sites/default/
ﬁles/media/ada_mental_health_toolkit_
questionnaires.pdf). As there are diabe-
tes distress measures that are validated
for people with type 1 and type 2 diabe-
tes at different life stages, it is important
to select a tool that is appropriate for
each person or population. If diabetes dis-
tress is identiﬁed, it should be acknowl-
edged and addressed. If indicated, the
person should be referred for follow-up
care (403).This may include speciﬁc diabe-
tes education to address areas of diabetes
self-care causing distress and impacting
clinical management and/or behavioral
intervention from a qualiﬁed behavioral
health professional, ideally one with exper-
tise in diabetes, or from another trained
health care professional. Several educational
and behavioral intervention strategies have
demonstrated beneﬁts for diabetes dis-
tress and, to a lesser degree, glycemic
outcomes, including education, psychologi-
cal therapies, such as cognitive behavioral
therapy (CBT) and mindfulness-based
therapies, and health behavior change
approaches, such as motivational interview-
ing (429,430,446,447). Data support diabe-
tes distress interventions delivered using
technology to reduce diabetes distress
(437), including phone-delivered CBT com-
bined with a smartphone application for
CBT (448). DSMES has been shown to re-
duce diabetes distress (5) and may also
beneﬁt A1C when combined with peer sup-
port (449). It may be helpful to provide
counseling regarding expected diabetes-
related versus generalized psychological dis-
tress, both at diagnosis and when disease
state or treatment changes occur (450). A
multisite RCT with adults with type 1 dia-
betes and elevated diabetes distress and
A1C demonstrated large improvements in
diabetes distress and small reductions in
A1C through two 3-month intervention ap-
proaches: a diabetes education interven-
tion with goal setting and a psychological
intervention that included emotion regu-
lation skills, motivational interviewing,
and goal setting (451). Among adults with
type 2 diabetes in the Veterans Affairs sys-
tem, an RCT demonstrated beneﬁts of
integrating a single session of mindfulness
intervention into DSMES, followed by a
booster session and mobile app-based
home practice over 24 weeks, with the
strongest effects on diabetes distress
(452). An RCT of CBT demonstrated posi-
tive beneﬁts for diabetes distress, A1C,
and depressive symptoms for up to 1 year
among adults with type 2 diabetes and el-
evated symptoms of distress or depres-
sion (453). An RCT among people with
type 1 and type 2 diabetes found mindful
self-compassion training increased self-
compassion, reduced depression and dia-
betes distress, and improved A1C (454).
An RCT of a resilience-focused cognitive
behavioral and social problem-solving
intervention compared with diabetes ed-
ucation (434) in teens with type 1 diabe-
tes showed that diabetes distress and
depressive symptoms were signiﬁcantly
reduced for up to 3 years post-interven-
tion, although neither A1C nor self-
management behaviors improved over
time. These recent studies support that a
combination of educational, behavioral,
and psychological intervention approaches
is needed to address distress, depression,
and A1C.
As with treatment of other diabetes-
associated behavioral and psychosocial
factors affecting disease outcomes, there
are few outcome data on long-term sys-
tematic treatment of diabetes distress
integrated into routine care. As the dia-
betes disease course and its manage-
ment are ﬂuid, it can be expected that
related distress may ﬂuctuate and may
need different methods of remediation
at different points in the life course and
as disease progression occurs.
Anxiety
Recommendation
5.40 Consider screening people with
diabetes for anxiety symptoms, fear of
hypoglycemia, or diabetes-related wor-
ries. Health care professionals can dis-
cuss
diabetes-related
worries
and
should consider referral to a qualiﬁed
behavioral health professional for fur-
ther assessment and treatment if anxi-
ety symptoms indicate interference
with diabetes self-management behav-
iors or quality of life. B
Anxiety symptoms and diagnosable dis-
orders (e.g., generalized anxiety disorder,
body dysmorphic disorder, obsessive
compulsive disorder, speciﬁc phobias,
and posttraumatic stress disorder) are
common in people with diabetes (455).
The Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance
System estimated the lifetime preva-
lence of generalized anxiety disorder to
be 19.5% in people with either type 1 or
type 2 diabetes (456). A common diabe-
tes-speciﬁc concern is fear related to hypo-
glycemia (457–459), which may explain
avoidance of behaviors associated with
lowering glucose, such as increasing insulin
doses or frequency of monitoring. Factors
related to greater fear of hypoglycemia in
people with diabetes and family members
include history of nocturnal hypoglycemia,
presence of other psychological concerns,
and sleep concerns (460). See Section 6,
“Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia,” for
more information about impaired aware-
ness of hypoglycemia and related fear of
hypoglycemia. Other common sources of
diabetes-related
anxiety
include
not
meeting blood glucose targets (455), in-
sulin injections or infusion (461), and on-
set of complications (1). People with
diabetes who exhibit excessive diabetes
self-management behaviors well beyond
what is prescribed or needed to achieve
glycemic goals may be experiencing
symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disor-
der (462). General anxiety is a predictor
of injection-related anxiety and is associ-
ated with fear of hypoglycemia (458,463).
Psychological and behavioral care can
be helpful to address symptoms of anxiety
in people with diabetes. Among adults
with type 2 diabetes and elevated depres-
sive symptoms, an RCT of collaborative
care demonstrated beneﬁts on anxiety
symptoms for up to 1 year (464). An RCT
of CBT for adults with type 2 diabetes
showed a reduction in health anxiety,
with CBT accounting for 77% of the re-
duction in health anxiety at 16 weeks of
follow-up; this trial also found decreased
depressive symptoms and diabetes dis-
tress (465). Additionally, an RCT showed
switching from intermittently scanned
CGM without alerts to real-time CGM
with alert functionality in adults with
type 1 diabetes decreased hypoglyce-
mia-related anxiety at 24 months of
follow-up while reducing A1C (466).
Thus, specialized behavioral intervention
from a qualiﬁed professional is needed
to treat hypoglycemia-related anxiety.
S94
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Depression
Recommendations
5.41 Conduct at least annual screening
of depressive symptoms in all people
with diabetes and more frequently
among those with a self-reported his-
toryofdepression.Use age-appropriate,
validated depression screening meas-
ures, recognizing that further evaluation
will be necessary for individuals who
have a positive screen. B
5.42 Beginning at diagnosis of compli-
cations or when there are signiﬁcant
changes in medical status, consider as-
sessment for depression. B
5.43 Refer to qualiﬁed behavioral
health professionals or other trained
health care professionals with experi-
ence using evidence-based treatment
approaches for depression in conjunc-
tion with collaborative care with the
diabetes treatment team. A
History of depression, current depres-
sion, and antidepressant medication use
are risk factors for the development of
type 2 diabetes, especially if the individ-
ual has other risk factors, such as obesity
and family history of type 2 diabetes
(467–469). Elevated depressive symptoms
and depressive disorders are common
among people with diabetes (385,459), af-
fecting approximately one in four people
with type 1 or type 2 diabetes (390), and
among parents of youth with diabetes
(470). Thus, routine screening for depres-
sive symptoms is indicated in this high-risk
population, including people with type 1
or type 2 diabetes, gestational diabetes
mellitus, and postpartum diabetes. Re-
gardless of diabetes type, women have
signiﬁcantly higher rates of depression
than men (471).
Routine monitoring with age-appropri-
ate validated measures (1) can help to
identify if referral is warranted (403,410).
Multisite studies have demonstrated feasi-
bility of implementing depressive symp-
tom screening protocols in diabetes clinics
and published practical guides for imple-
mentation (407–410,472). Adults with a
history of depressive symptoms need on-
going monitoring of depression recurrence
within the context of routine care (467). In-
tegrating behavioral and physical health
care can improve outcomes. When a per-
son with diabetes is receiving psychological
therapy, the behavioral health professional
should be incorporated into or collaborate
with the diabetes treatment team (473).
As with DSMES, person-centered collabora-
tive care approaches have been shown to
improve both depression and medical out-
comes (473). Depressive symptoms may
also be a manifestation of reduced quality
of life secondary to disease burden (also
see DIABETES DISTRESS, above) and resultant
changes in resource allocation impacting
the person and their family. When de-
pressive symptoms are identiﬁed, it is
important to query origins, both diabetes-
speciﬁc ones and those due to other life
circumstances (444,474).
Trials have shown consistent evidence of
improvements in depressive symptoms
and variable beneﬁts for A1C when depres-
sion is simultaneously treated (401,473,
475), whether through pharmacological
treatment, group therapy, psychotherapy,
or collaborative care (398,429,430,476,
477). Psychological interventions targeting
depressive symptoms have shown efﬁcacy
when delivered via digital technologies
(478). A systematic review of internet-
delivered CBT studies indicated beneﬁts
across chronic health conditions, including
diabetes (479). For people with diabetes,
an RCT comparing internet plus tele-
phonic CBT to usual care found moderate
to large improvements in depressive
symptoms at 12 months (480). Physical
activity interventions also demonstrate
beneﬁts for depressive symptoms and
A1C (318). It is important to note that the
medical treatment plan should also be
monitored in response to reduction in de-
pressive symptoms.
Disordered Eating Behavior
Recommendations
5.44 Consider screening for disor-
dered or disrupted eating using vali-
dated
screening
measures
when
hyperglycemia and weight loss are
unexplained based on self-reported
behaviors related to medication dos-
ing, meal plan, and physical activity.
In addition, a review of the medical
treatment plan is recommended to
identify potential treatment-related
effects on hunger/caloric intake. B
5.45 Consider reevaluating the treat-
ment plan of people with diabetes
who present with symptoms of disor-
dered eating behavior, an eating dis-
order, or disrupted patterns of eating,
in
consultation
with
a
qualiﬁed
professional. Key qualiﬁcations include
familiarity with diabetes disease physi-
ology, treatments for diabetes and dis-
ordered eating behaviors, and weight-
related and psychological risk factors
for disordered eating behaviors. B
Estimated prevalence of disordered eat-
ing behavior and diagnosable eating dis-
orders in people with diabetes varies
(481–483). For people with type 1 diabe-
tes, insulin omission causing glycosuria
in order to lose weight is the most com-
monly reported disordered eating be-
havior (484,485); in people with type 2
diabetes, bingeing (excessive food intake
with an accompanying sense of loss of
control) is most commonly reported. For
people with type 2 diabetes treated with
insulin, intentional omission is also fre-
quently reported (486). People with dia-
betes and diagnosable eating disorders
have high rates of comorbid psychiatric
disorders (487). People with type 1 dia-
betes and eating disorders often have
high rates of diabetes distress and fear
of hypoglycemia (488).
Diabetes care professionals should
monitor for disordered eating behaviors
using validated measures (489). When
evaluating symptoms of disordered or
disrupted eating (when the individual ex-
hibits eating behaviors that appear mal-
adaptive but are not volitional, such as
bingeing caused by loss of satiety cues),
etiology and motivation for the behavior
should be evaluated (483,490). Mixed in-
tervention results point to the need for
treatment of eating disorders and disor-
dered eating behavior in the context of
the disease and its treatment. Given the
complexities of treating disordered eating
behaviors and disrupted eating patterns
in people with diabetes, it is recom-
mended that interprofessional care teams
include or collaborate with a health pro-
fessional trained to identify and treat eat-
ing behaviors with expertise in disordered
eating and diabetes (491). Key qualiﬁca-
tions for such professionals include famil-
iarity with diabetes disease physiology,
weight-related and psychological risk fac-
tors for disordered eating behaviors, and
treatments for diabetes and disordered
eating behaviors. More rigorous methods
to identify underlying mechanisms of ac-
tion that drive change in eating and treat-
ment behaviors, as well as associated
diabetesjournals.org/care
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
S95
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

mental distress, are needed (492). Health
care teams may consider the appropriate-
ness of technology use among people
with diabetes and disordered eating be-
haviors, although more research on the
risks and beneﬁts is needed (493). Cau-
tion should be taken in labeling individu-
als with diabetes as having a diagnosable
psychiatric disorder, i.e., an eating disor-
der, when disordered or disrupted eating
patterns are found to be associated with
the disease and its treatment. In other
words, patterns of maladaptive food in-
take that appear to have a psychological
origin may be driven by physiologic dis-
ruption in hunger and satiety cues, meta-
bolic perturbations, and/or secondary
distress because of the individual’s inabil-
ity to control their hunger and satiety
(483,490).
The use of incretin therapies may have
potential relevance to the treatment of
disrupted or disordered eating (see Sec-
tion 8, “Obesity and Weight Management
for the Prevention and Treatment of
Type 2 Diabetes”). Incretin therapies work
in the appetite and reward circuitries to
modulate food intake and energy bal-
ance, reducing uncontrollable hunger,
overeating, and bulimic symptoms (494),
although mechanisms are not completely
understood (495).Weight loss from these
medications (496) may also improve
quality of life. More research is needed
about whether use of incretins and
other medications affects physiologi-
cally based eating behavior in people
with diabetes.
Serious Mental Illness
Recommendations
5.46 Provide an increased level of
support for people with diabetes and
serious mental illness through en-
hanced monitoring of and assistance
with diabetes self-management be-
haviors. B
5.47 Monitor changes in body weight,
glycemia, and lipids in adolescents and
adults with diabetes who are prescribed
second-generation antipsychotic medi-
cations; adjust the treatment plan ac-
cordingly, if needed. C
Studies of individuals with serious mental
illness, particularly schizophrenia and other
thought disorders, show signiﬁcantly in-
creased rates of type 2 diabetes (497).
People
with
schizophrenia and
other
thought disorders who are prescribed anti-
psychotics should be monitored for predia-
betes and type 2 diabetes because of the
known comorbidity. Changes in body
weight, glycemia, and lipids should be
monitored every 12–16 weeks, unless clini-
cally indicated sooner (498). Disordered
thinking and judgment can be expected to
make it difﬁcult to engage in behavior that
reduces risk factors for type 2 diabetes,
such as restrained eating for weight man-
agement. Further, people with serious be-
havioral health disorders and diabetes
frequently experience moderate psycho-
logical distress, suggesting pervasive intru-
sion of behavioral health issues into daily
functioning (499). Serious mental illness is
often associated with the inability to eval-
uate and apply information to make judg-
ments about treatment options. When a
person has an established diagnosis of a
mental illness that impacts judgment, ac-
tivities of daily living, and ability to estab-
lish a collaborative relationship with care
professionals, it is helpful to include a
nonmedical caretaker in decision-making
regarding the medical treatment plan.
This caretaker can help improve the per-
son’s ability to follow the agreed-upon
treatment plan through both monitoring
and caretaking functions (500).
Coordinated management of prediabe-
tes or diabetes and serious mental illness is
recommended to achieve diabetes treat-
ment targets. The diabetes care team, in
collaboration with other care professionals,
should work to provide an enhanced level
of care and self-management support for
people with diabetes and serious mental
illness based on individual capacity and
needs. Such care may include remote
monitoring, facilitating health care aides,
and providing diabetes training for family
members, community support person-
nel, and other caregivers. Qualitative re-
search suggests that educational and
behavioral intervention may provide ben-
eﬁt via group support, accountability, and
assistance with applying diabetes knowl-
edge (501).
Cognitive Capacity/Impairment
Recommendations
5.48 Cognitive capacity should be
monitored throughout the life span
for all individuals with diabetes, par-
ticularly in those who have docu-
mented cognitive disabilities, those
who experience severe hypoglyce-
mia, very young children, and older
adults. B
5.49 If cognitive capacity changes or
appears to be suboptimal for decision-
making and/or behavioral self-man-
agement, referral for a formal assess-
ment should be considered. E
Cognitive capacity is generally deﬁned as
attention, memory, logic and reasoning,
and auditory and visual processing, all of
which are involved in diabetes self-
management behavior (502). Having dia-
betes (type 1 or type 2) over decades has
been shown to be associated with cogni-
tive decline (503–505). A host of factors
have been linked with cognitive impair-
ment in people with type 1 diabetes, in-
cluding diabetes-speciﬁc (e.g., younger
age at diagnosis, longer disease duration,
more time in glycemic extremes, recur-
rent diabetic ketoacidosis, higher A1C,
and presence of microvascular complica-
tions), other medical (e.g., dyslipidemia,
intestinal ﬂora, and poorer sleep quality),
and sociodemographic (e.g., female gen-
der and lower educational level) factors
(506). Declines have been shown to im-
pact executive function and information
processing speed; they are not consistent
between people, and evidence is lacking
regarding a known course of decline (507).
Diagnosis of dementia is more prevalent
among people with diabetes, both type 1
and type 2 (508). Executive functioning is
an aspect of cognitive capacity that has
particular relevance to diabetes manage-
ment. Attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disor-
der has been linked with twice the risk of
type 2 diabetes (509). Among youth and
young adults with type 1 diabetes, lower
executive functioning has been linked with
more difﬁculties with diabetes self-man-
agement and higher A1C (510). In contrast,
higher self-regulation has been linked with
better emotional and diabetes-speciﬁc
functioning (511).Thus, monitoring of cog-
nitive capacity and skills among individuals
with or at risk for diabetes is recom-
mended, particularly regarding their ability
to self-monitor and make judgments
about their symptoms, physical status, and
needed alterations to their self-manage-
ment behaviors, all of which are mediated
by executive function (508).
As with other disorders affecting men-
tal
capacity
(e.g.,
major
psychiatric
S96
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

disorders), the key issue is whether the
person can collaborate with the care
team to achieve optimal metabolic out-
comes and prevent complications, both
short and long term (499).When this abil-
ity is shown to be altered, declining, or
absent, a lay care professional should be
introduced into the care team who serves
in the capacities of a day-to-day monitor
as well as a liaison with the rest of the
care team (1). Cognitive capacity also con-
tributes to ability to beneﬁt from diabetes
education and may indicate the need for
alternative teaching approaches as well
as remote monitoring. Youth will need
second-party monitoring (e.g., parents
and adult caregivers) until they are de-
velopmentally able to evaluate neces-
sary information for self-management
decisions and to inform resultant behav-
ior changes.
Episodes of severe hypoglycemia are in-
dependently associated with decline as
well as the more immediate symptoms of
mental confusion (512). Early-onset type 1
diabetes has been shown to be associ-
ated with potential long-term deﬁcits in
intellectual abilities, especially in the con-
text of repeated episodes of severe hypo-
glycemia (513), and is correlated with
higher A1C and sensor glucose values
(514). (See Section 14, “Children and
Adolescents,” for information on early-
onset diabetes and cognitive abilities and
the effects of severe hypoglycemia on
children’s cognitive and academic perfor-
mance.) Thus, for myriad reasons, cogni-
tive capacity should be assessed during
routine care to ascertain the person’s
ability to maintain and adjust self-
management behaviors, such as dosing
of medications, remediation approaches
to glycemic excursions, etc., and to de-
termine whether to enlist a caregiver in
monitoring and decision-making regarding
management behaviors. If cognitive ca-
pacity to carry out self-maintenance be-
haviors is questioned, an age-appropriate
test of cognitive capacity is recommended
(1). Cognitive capacity should be evalu-
ated in the context of the person’s age,
for example, in very young children who
are not expected to manage their disease
independently and in older adults who
may need active monitoring of treatment
plan behaviors.
Cognitive decline is more severe in
older adults with type 2 diabetes (515).
Longitudinal epidemiological studies have
documented that chronic hyperglycemia,
older age, less education, retinopathy,
and nephropathy are associated with dia-
betes-related cognitive dysfunction (516).
Importantly, the risk of cognitive decline
can be reduced through improved A1C
(517). Exercise may be a potential non-
pharmacological treatment pathway for
cognitive impairment in older adults with
type 2 diabetes (518,519).
Sleep Health
Recommendations
5.50 Consider screening for sleep health
in people with diabetes, including symp-
toms of sleep disorders, disruptions to
sleep due to diabetes symptoms or
management needs, and worries about
sleep. Refer to sleep medicine specialists
and/or qualiﬁed behavioral health pro-
fessionals as indicated. B
5.51 Counsel people with diabetes
to practice sleep-promoting routines
and habits (e.g., maintaining consis-
tent sleep schedule and limiting caf-
feine in the afternoon). A
The associations between sleep prob-
lems and diabetes are complex: sleep
disorders are a risk factor for developing
type 2 diabetes (520,521) and possibly
gestational diabetes mellitus (522,523).
People with diabetes across the life span
often experience sleep disruptions and
reduced sleep quality (524,525), and
sleep problems are also common in pa-
rents of youth with diabetes, especially
soon after diagnosis (526,527). Disrupted
sleep and sleep disorders, including ob-
structive sleep apnea (528), insomnia,
and sleep disturbances (529), are com-
mon among people with diabetes. In
type 1 diabetes, estimates of poor sleep
range from 30% to 50% (530), and esti-
mates of moderate to severe obstructive
sleep apnea are >50% (531). In type 2
diabetes, 24–86% of people are esti-
mated to have obstructive sleep apnea
(532), 39% to have insomnia, and 8–45%
to have restless leg syndrome (i.e., an
uncontrollable urge to move legs) (533).
Further, people with type 2 diabetes and
restless leg syndrome are more likely to
experience microvascular and macrovas-
cular complications (534) as well as de-
pression (535). Additionally, people with
diabetes who perform shift work in-
crease their risk for circadian rhythm dis-
orders, which are associated with higher
A1C (536), neuropathy (537), and de-
creased psychological well-being (537).
Health care professionals should con-
sider a comprehensive evaluation of the
daily lifestyles of people with diabetes to
decrease risk factors, including low sleep
duration, shift work, and days off, given
their associations with hyperglycemia,
hypertension, dyslipidemia, and weight
gain (538).
Sleep
disturbances
are
associated
with less engagement in diabetes self-
management and may interfere with glu-
cose levels within the target range among
people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes
(525,529,531,533,539,540). Risk of hypo-
glycemia poses speciﬁc challenges for sleep
in people with type 1 diabetes and may re-
quire targeted assessment and treatment
approaches (541). People with type 1 dia-
betes and their family members also
describe diabetes management needs in-
terfering with sleep and experiencing wor-
ries about poor sleep (542). Both helpful
and challenging aspects of diabetes tech-
nology use have been described in rela-
tion to sleep (542), with the greatest
perceived beneﬁts being related to auto-
mated insulin delivery systems (543–545).
For these reasons, detection and treat-
ment of sleep disorders should be consid-
ered a part of standardized care for
people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes.
As for the general population, there
are evidence-based strategies to improve
sleep for people with diabetes. CBTshows
beneﬁts for sleep in people with diabetes
(429), including CBT for insomnia, which
demonstrates improvements in sleep out-
comes and possible small improvements
in A1C and fasting glucose (546). There is
also evidence that sleep extension and
pharmacological treatments for sleep can
improve sleep outcomes and possibly in-
sulin resistance (541,546). Lastly, sleep
education, or sleep hygiene, improves
sleep quality, reduces A1C, and decreases
insulin resistance in adults with type 2 di-
abetes (547). Thus, diabetes care profes-
sionals are encouraged to counsel people
with diabetes to use sleep-promoting rou-
tines and practices, such as establishing a
regular bedtime and rise time, creating a
dark, quiet area for sleep with tempera-
ture and humidity control, establishing
a pre-sleep routine, putting electronic de-
vices (except diabetes management devi-
ces) in silent/off mode, exercising during
the day, avoiding daytime naps, limiting
caffeine and nicotine in the evening,
diabetesjournals.org/care
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
S97
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

avoiding spicy foods at night, and avoiding
alcohol before bedtime (548). For people
with diabetes who have signiﬁcant sleep
difﬁculties, referral to sleep specialists to
address the medical and behavioral as-
pects of sleep is recommended, ideally in
collaboration with the diabetes care pro-
fessional (Fig. 5.1).
References
1. Young-Hyman D, de Groot M, Hill-Briggs F,
Gonzalez JS, Hood K, Peyrot M. Psychosocial care
for people with diabetes: a position statement of
the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care
2016;39:2126–2140
2. Powers MA, Bardsley JK, Cypress M, et al.
Diabetes self-management education and support
in adults with type 2 diabetes: a consensus report
of
the
American
Diabetes
Association,
the
Association
of
Diabetes
Care
&
Education
Specialists,
the
Academy
of
Nutrition
and
Dietetics, the American Academy of Family
Physicians, the American Academy of PAs, the
American Association of Nurse Practitioners, and
the American Pharmacists Association. Diabetes
Care 2020;43:1636–1649
3. Rutten G, Alzaid A. Person-centred type 2
diabetes care: time for a paradigm shift. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol 2018;6:264–266
4. Dickinson JK, Guzman SJ, Maryniuk MD, et al.
The use of language in diabetes care and education.
Diabetes Care 2017;40:1790–1799
5. Fisher L, Hessler D, Glasgow RE, et al. REDEEM:
a pragmatic trial to reduce diabetes distress.
Diabetes Care 2013;36:2551–2558
6. Huang Y, Wei X, Wu T, Chen R, Guo A.
Collaborative care for patients with depression
and diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. BMC Psychiatry 2013;13:260
7. Hill-Briggs F. Problem solving in diabetes self-
management: a model of chronic illness self-
management behavior. Ann Behav Med 2003;25:
182–193
8. Greenwood DA, Howell F, Scher L, et al. A
framework
for
optimizing
technology-enabled
diabetes and cardiometabolic care and education:
the role of the diabetes care and education
specialist. Diabetes Educ 2020;46:315–322
9. Tran VT, Barnes C, Montori VM, Falissard B,
Ravaud P. Taxonomy of the burden of treatment:
a multi-country web-based qualitative study of
patients with chronic conditions. BMC Med
2015;13:115
10. Fitzpatrick SL, Golden SH, Stewart K, et al.
Effect of DECIDE (Decision-making Education for
Choices In Diabetes Everyday) program delivery
modalities on clinical and behavioral outcomes in
urban african americans with type 2 diabetes: a
randomized trial. Diabetes Care 2016;39:2149–
2157
11. Brunisholz KD, Briot P, Hamilton S, et al.
Diabetes self-management education improves
quality of care and clinical outcomes determined
by a diabetes bundle measure. J Multidiscip
Healthc 2014;7:533–542
12. Dickinson JK, Maryniuk MD. Building the-
rapeutic relationships: choosing words that
put people ﬁrst. Clin Diabetes 2017;35:51–54
13. Davis J, Fischl AH, Beck J, et al. 2022 National
standards for diabetes self-management education
and support. Sci Diabetes Self Manag Care 2022;
48:44–59
14. Tang TS, Funnell MM, Brown MB, Kurlander JE.
Self-management support in “real-world” settings:
an empowerment-based intervention. Patient Educ
Couns 2010;79:178–184
15. Marrero DG, Ard J, Delamater AM, et al.
Twenty-ﬁrst century behavioral medicine: a context
for empowering clinicians and patients with
diabetes: a consensus report. Diabetes Care 2013;
36:463–470
16. Rutten G, Van Vugt H, de Koning E. Person-
centered diabetes care and patient activation in
people with type 2 diabetes. BMJ Open Diabetes
Res Care 2020;8:e001926
17. Norris SL, Lau J, Smith SJ, Schmid CH, Engelgau
MM. Self-management education for adults with
type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis of the effect on
glycemic control. Diabetes Care 2002;25:1159–
1171
18. Frosch DL, Uy V, Ochoa S, Mangione CM.
Evaluation of a behavior support intervention for
patients with poorly controlled diabetes. Arch
Intern Med 2011;171:2011–2017
19. Cooke D, Bond R, Lawton J, et al. Structured
type 1 diabetes education delivered within routine
care: impact on glycemic control and diabetes-
speciﬁc quality of life. Diabetes Care 2013;36:270–
272
20. Chrvala CA, Sherr D, Lipman RD. Diabetes
self-management education for adults with type 2
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review of the
effect on glycemic control. Patient Educ Couns
2016;99:926–943
21. Bekele BB, Negash S, Bogale B, et al. Effect
of diabetes self-management education (DSME)
on glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level among
patients with T2DM: systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Diabetes Metab Syndr 2021;15:177–185
22. Nkhoma DE, Soko CJ, Bowrin P, et al. Digital
interventions self-management education for type 1
and 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Comput Methods Programs Biomed
2021;210:106370
23. Steinsbekk A, Rygg L, Lisulo M, Rise MB,
Fretheim A. Group based diabetes self-management
education compared to routine treatment for
people with type 2 diabetes mellitus. A systematic
review with meta-analysis. BMC Health Serv Res
2012;12:213
24. Cochran J, Conn VS. Meta-analysis of quality of
life outcomes following diabetes self-management
training. Diabetes Educ 2008;34:815–823
25. Davidson P, LaManna J, Davis J, et al. The
effects of diabetes self-management education
on quality of life for persons with type 1 diabetes:
a systematic review of randomized controlled
trials. Sci Diabetes Self Manag Care 2022;48:111–
135
26. He X, Li J, Wang B, et al. Diabetes self-
management education reduces risk of all-cause
mortality in type 2 diabetes patients: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Endocrine 2017;55:712–
731
27. Thorpe CT, Fahey LE, Johnson H, Deshpande
M, Thorpe JM, Fisher EB. Facilitating healthy
coping in patients with diabetes: a systematic
review. Diabetes Educ 2013;39:33–52
28. Robbins
JM,
Thatcher
GE,
Webb
DA,
Valdmanis VG. Nutritionist visits, diabetes classes,
and hospitalization rates and charges: the Urban
Diabetes Study. Diabetes Care 2008;31:655–660
29. Duncan I, Ahmed T, Li QE, et al. Assessing
the value of the diabetes educator. Diabetes
Educ 2011;37:638–657
30. Strawbridge LM, Lloyd JT, Meadow A, Riley GF,
Howell BL. One-year outcomes of diabetes self-
management training among Medicare beneﬁciaries
newly diagnosed with diabetes. Med Care 2017;55:
391–397
31. Johnson TM, Murray MR, Huang Y. Associations
between self-management education and com-
prehensive
diabetes
clinical
care.
Diabetes
Spectr 2010;23:41–46
32. Duncan I, Birkmeyer C, Coughlin S, Li QE,
Sherr D, Boren S. Assessing the value of diabetes
education. Diabetes Educ 2009;35:752–760
33. Piatt GA, Anderson RM, Brooks MM, et al.
3-Year follow-up of clinical and behavioral
improvements following a multifaceted diabetes
care intervention: results of a randomized controlled
trial. Diabetes Educ 2010;36:301–309
34. Dallosso H, Mandalia P, Gray LJ, et al. The
effectiveness of a structured group education
programme for people with established type 2
diabetes in a multi-ethnic population in primary
care: a cluster randomised trial. Nutr Metab
Cardiovasc Dis 2022;32:1549–1559
35. Glazier RH, Bajcar J, Kennie NR, Willson K. A
systematic review of interventions to improve
diabetes care in socially disadvantaged populations.
Diabetes Care 2006;29:1675–1688
36. Hawthorne K, Robles Y, Cannings-John R,
Edwards AG. Culturally appropriate health education
for type 2 diabetes mellitus in ethnic minority
groups. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008;3:
CD006424
37. Chodosh J, Morton SC, Mojica W, et al.
Meta-analysis: chronic disease self-management
programs for older adults. Ann Intern Med
2005;143:427–438
38. Sarkisian CA, Brown AF, Norris KC, Wintz RL,
Mangione CM. A systematic review of diabetes
self-care interventions for older, African American,
or Latino adults. Diabetes Educ 2003;29:467–479
39. Peyrot
M,
Rubin RR.
Behavioral
and
psychosocial interventions in diabetes: a conceptual
review. Diabetes Care 2007;30:2433–2440
40. Naik AD, Palmer N, Petersen NJ, et al.
Comparative effectiveness of goal setting in diabetes
mellitus group clinics: randomized clinical trial. Arch
Intern Med 2011;171:453–459
41. Mannucci E, Giaccari A, Gallo M, et al. Self-
management in patients with type 2 diabetes:
group-based versus individual education. A
systematic review with meta-analysis of randomized
trails. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2022;32:330–336
42. Duke SA, Colagiuri S, Colagiuri R. Individual
patient education for people with type 2
diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2009;2009:Cd005268
43. Odgers-Jewell K, Ball LE, Kelly JT, Isenring EA,
Reidlinger DP, Thomas R. Effectiveness of group-
based self-management education for individuals
with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review with
meta-analyses and meta-regression. Diabet Med
2017;34:1027–1039
44. Zhao X, Huang H, Zheng S. Effectiveness
of internet and phone-based interventions on
diabetes management of children and adolescents
with type 1 diabetes: a systematic review.
Worldviews Evid Based Nurs 2021;18:217–225
S98
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

45. Pereira K, Phillips B, Johnson C,Vorderstrasse
A. Internet delivered diabetes self-management
education: a review. Diabetes Technol Ther 2015;
17:55–63
46. Sepah SC, Jiang L, Peters AL. Long-term
outcomes of a web-based diabetes prevention
program: 2-year results of a single-arm longitudinal
study. J Med Internet Res 2015;17:e92
47. Greenwood DA, Gee PM, Fatkin KJ, Peeples
M. A systematic review of reviews evaluating
technology-enabled diabetes self-management
education and support. J Diabetes Sci Technol
2017;11:1015–1027
48. Athinarayanan SJ, Adams RN, Hallberg SJ,
et al. Long-term effects of a novel continuous
remote care intervention including nutritional
ketosis for the management of type 2 diabetes: a
2-year non-randomized clinical trial. Front Endocrinol
(Lausanne) 2019;10:348
49. Kumar S, Moseson H, Uppal J, Juusola JL. A
diabetes mobile app with in-app coaching from a
certiﬁed diabetes educator reduces A1C for
individuals with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Educ
2018;44:226–236
50. Hallberg SJ, McKenzie AL, Williams PT, et al.
Effectiveness and safety of a novel care model for
the management of type 2 diabetes at 1 year: an
open-label, non-randomized, controlled study.
Diabetes Ther 2018;9:583–612
51. Xu T, Pujara S, Sutton S, Rhee M.Telemedicine
in the management of type 1 diabetes. Prev
Chronic Dis 2018;15:E13
52. Dening J, Islam SMS, George E, Maddison R.
Web-based interventions for dietary behavior in
adults with type 2 diabetes: systematic review of
randomized controlled trials. J Med Internet Res
2020;22:e16437
53. Anderson
A,
O’Connell
SS, Thomas
C,
Chimmanamada R. Telehealth interventions to
improve diabetes management among Black and
Hispanic patients: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Racial Ethn Health Disparities 2022;
9:2375–2386
54. Sherifali D, Brozic A, Agema P, et al. Effect of
diabetes health coaching on glycemic control and
quality of life in adults living with type 2 diabetes:
a community-based, randomized, controlled trial.
Can J Diabetes 2021;45:594–600
55. von Storch K, Graaf E,Wunderlich M, Rietz C,
Polidori MC, Woopen C. Telemedicine-assisted
self-management program for type 2 diabetes
patients. Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:514–521
56. Davis J, Fischl AH, Beck J, et al. 2022 National
standards for diabetes self-management education
and support. Diabetes Care 2022;45:484–494
57. Omar MA, Hasan S, Palaian S, Mahameed S.
The impact of a self-management educational
program coordinated through WhatsApp on
diabetes control. Pharm Pract (Granada) 2020;
18:1841
58. Liang K, Xie Q, Nie J, Deng J. Study on the
effect of education for insulin injection in diabetic
patients with new simulation tools. Medicine
(Baltimore) 2021;100:e25424
59. Sahin C, Courtney KL, Naylor PJ, Rhodes RE.
Tailored mobile text messaging interventions
targeting type 2 diabetes self-management: a
systematic review and a meta-analysis. Digit
Health 2019;5:2055207619845279
60. Leong CM, Lee TI, Chien YM, Kuo LN, Kuo YF,
Chen HY. Social media-delivered patient education
to enhance self-management and attitudes of
patients with type 2 diabetes during the COVID-19
pandemic: randomized controlled trial. J Med
Internet Res 2022;24:e31449
61. Xia SF, Maitiniyazi G, Chen Y, et al. Web-
based TangPlan and WeChat combination to
support self-management for patients with type 2
diabetes:
randomized
controlled
trial.
JMIR
Mhealth Uhealth 2022;10:e30571
62. Jiang Y, Ramachandran HJ, Teo JYC, et al.
Effectiveness of a nurse-led smartphone-based
self-management programme for people with
poorly controlled type 2 diabetes: a randomized
controlled trial. J Adv Nurs 2022;78:1154–1165
63. Gershkowitz BD, Hillert CJ, Crotty BH. Digital
coaching
strategies
to
facilitate
behavioral
change in type 2 diabetes: a systematic review. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2021;106:e1513–e1520
64. Lee MK, Lee DY, Ahn HY, Park CY. A novel
user utility score for diabetes management using
tailored mobile coaching: secondary analysis of a
randomized controlled trial. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth
2021;9:e17573
65. Strategies to Enhance New CGM Use in Early
Childhood (SENCE) Study Group. A randomized
clinical trial assessing continuous glucose
monitoring
(CGM)
use
with
standardized
education with or without a family behavioral
intervention compared with ﬁngerstick blood
glucose monitoring in very young children with
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2021;44:464–472
66. Aronson R, Brown RE, Chu L, et al. IMpact of
ﬂash glucose Monitoring in pEople with type 2
Diabetes Inadequately controlled with non-insulin
Antihyperglycaemic
ThErapy
(IMMEDIATE):
a
randomized
controlled
trial.
Diabetes
Obes
Metab 2023;25:1024–1031
67. Patil SP, Albanese-O’Neill A, Yehl K, Seley JJ,
Hughes
AS.
Professional
competencies
for
diabetes technology use in the care setting. Sci
Diabetes Self Manag Care 2022;48:437–445
68. Isaacs D, Cox C, Schwab K, et al. Technology
integration: the role of the diabetes care and
education specialist in practice. Diabetes Educ
2020;46:323–334
69. Scalzo P. From the Association of Diabetes
Care & Education Specialists: the role of the
diabetes care and education specialist as a
champion of technology integration. Sci Diabetes
Self Manag Care 2021;47:120–123
70. Greenwood DA, Litchman ML, Isaacs D, et al.
A new taxonomy for technology-enabled diabetes
self-management interventions: results of an
umbrella review. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2022;
16:812–824
71. van Eikenhorst L, Taxis K, van Dijk L, de Gier
H. Pharmacist-led self-management interventions
to improve diabetes outcomes. A systematic
literature review and meta-analysis. Front
Pharmacol 2017;8:891
72. Tshiananga JK, Kocher S, Weber C, Erny-
Albrecht K, Berndt K, Neeser K. The effect of
nurse-led diabetes self-management education
on glycosylated hemoglobin and cardiovascular
risk factors: a meta-analysis. Diabetes Educ
2012;38:108–123
73. Evert AB, Dennison M, Gardner CD, et al.
Nutrition therapy for adults with diabetes or
prediabetes: a consensus report. Diabetes Care
2019;42:731–754
74. Rodriguez K, Ryan D, Dickinson JK, Phan V.
Improving
quality
outcomes:
the
value
of
diabetes care and education specialists. Clin
Diabetes 2022;40:356–365
75. Spencer MS, Kieffer EC, Sinco B, et al.
Outcomes at 18 months from a community
health worker and peer leader diabetes self-
management program for Latino adults. Diabetes
Care 2018;41:1414–1422
76. Shah M, Kaselitz E, Heisler M. The role of
community health workers in diabetes: update on
current literature. Curr Diab Rep 2013;13:163–171
77. Heisler M, Vijan S, Makki F, Piette JD.
Diabetes control with reciprocal peer support
versus nurse care management: a randomized
trial. Ann Intern Med 2010;153:507–515
78. Long
JA,
Jahnle
EC,
Richardson
DM,
Loewenstein G, Volpp KG. Peer mentoring and
ﬁnancial incentives to improve glucose control in
African American veterans: a randomized trial.
Ann Intern Med 2012;156:416–424
79. Fisher EB, Boothroyd RI, Elstad EA, et al.
Peer support of complex health behaviors in
prevention
and
disease
management
with
special reference to diabetes: systematic reviews.
Clin Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;3:4
80. Litchman ML, Oser TK, Hodgson L, et al. In-
person and technology-mediated peer support in
diabetes care: a systematic review of reviews and
gap analysis. Diabetes Educ 2020;46:230–241
81. Foster G, Taylor SJ, Eldridge SE, Ramsay J,
Grifﬁths CJ. Self-management education programmes
by lay leaders for people with chronic conditions.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007;4:CD005108
82. Powell RE, Zaccardi F, Beebe C, et al.
Strategies for overcoming therapeutic inertia in
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab 2021;23:2137–
2154
83. Hill-Briggs F, Adler NE, Berkowitz SA, et al.
Social determinants of health and diabetes: a
scientiﬁc review. Diabetes Care 2020;44:258–279
84. Mendez
I,
Lundeen
EA,
Saunders
M,
Williams A, Saaddine J, Albright A. Diabetes self-
management education and association with
diabetes self-care and clinical preventive care
practices. Sci Diabetes Self Manag Care 2022;
48:23–34
85. Horigan G, Davies M, Findlay-White F,
Chaney D, Coates V. Reasons why patients
referred to diabetes education programmes
choose not to attend: a systematic review. Diabet
Med 2017;34:14–26
86. Carey ME, Agarwal S, Horne R, Davies M,
Slevin M, Coates V. Exploring organizational
support for the provision of structured self-
management education for people with Type 2
diabetes: ﬁndings from a qualitative study.
Diabet Med 2019;36:761–770
87. Roth SE, Gronowski B, Jones KG, et al.
Evaluation of an integrated intervention to
address clinical care and social needs among
patients with type 2 diabetes. J Gen Intern Med
2023;38:38–44
88. Johnson CM, D’Eramo Melkus G, Reagan L,
et al. Learning in a virtual environment to
improve type 2 diabetes outcomes: randomized
controlled trial. JMIR Form Res 2023;7:e40359
89. Department of Health and Human Services.
Telehealth.HHS.gov. Telehealth and remote patient
monitoring. Accessed 14 October 2023. Available
from https://telehealth.hhs.gov/providers/preparing-
patients-for-telehealth/telehealth-and-remote-
patient-monitoring/
diabetesjournals.org/care
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
S99
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

90. Center For Health Law and Policy Innovation.
Reconsidering
cost-sharing
for
diabetes
self-
management education: recommendations for
policy reform. Accessed 14 October 2023. Available
from https://chlpi.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/
07/6.11.15-Reconsidering-Cost-Sharing-for-DSME-
cover.jpg
91. Turner RM, Ma Q, Lorig K, Greenberg J,
DeVries AR. Evaluation of a diabetes self-
management
program:
claims
analysis
on
comorbid illnesses, health care utilization, and
cost. J Med Internet Res 2018;20:e207
92. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
COVID-19 Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on
Medicare Fee-for-Service (FFS) Billing. Accessed
14 October 2023. Available from https://www.
cms.gov/ﬁles/document/03092020-covid-19-faqs-
508.pdf
93. American Diabetes Association. Standards of
medical care for patients with diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes Care 1989;12:365–368
94. Lichtenstein AH, Appel LJ,Vadiveloo M, et al.
2021 Dietary guidance to improve cardiovascular
health: a scientiﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation 2021;144:e472–
e487
95. Khunti K, de Boer IH, Rossing P. Chronic
kidney disease in diabetes: guidelines from
KDIGO. Am Fam Physician 2021;103:698–700
96. Holt RIG, DeVries JH, Hess-Fischl A, et al.The
management of type 1 diabetes in adults. A
consensus report by the American Diabetes
Association (ADA) and the European Association
for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetologia
2021;64:2609–2652
97. Davies MJ, Aroda VR, Collins BS, et al.
Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes,
2022. A consensus report by the American
Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European
Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD).
Diabetes Care 2022;45:2753–2786
98. U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2020–2025.
9th ed. 2020. Accessed 5 August 2023. Available
from
https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/
default/ﬁles/2020-12/Dietary_Guidelines_for_
Americans_2020-2025.pdf
99. Forouhi NG. Embracing complexity: making
sense of diet, nutrition, obesity and type 2
diabetes. Diabetologia 2023;66:786–799
100. Davies MJ, D’Alessio DA, Fradkin J, et al.
Management
of
hyperglycemia
in
type
2
diabetes, 2018. A consensus report by the
American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the
European Association for the Study of Diabetes
(EASD). Diabetes Care 2018;41:2669–2701
101. Marincic PZ, Salazar MV, Hardin A, et al.
Diabetes self-management education and medical
nutrition therapy: a multisite study documenting
the efﬁcacy of registered dietitian nutritionist
interventions in the management of glycemic
control and diabetic dyslipidemia through retro-
spective chart review. J Acad Nutr Diet 2019;
119:449–463
102. Briggs Early K, Stanley K. Position of the
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics: the role of
medical nutrition therapy and registered dietitian
nutritionists in the prevention and treatment of
prediabetes and type 2 diabetes. J Acad Nutr Diet
2018;118:343–353
103. Dobrow L, Estrada I, Burkholder-Cooley N,
Miklavcic J. Potential effectiveness of registered
dietitian
nutritionists
in
healthy
behavior
interventions for managing type 2 diabetes in
older adults: a systematic review. Front Nutr
2021;8:737410
104. Franz MJ, MacLeod J, Evert A, et al.
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics Nutrition
practice guideline for type 1 and type 2 diabetes
in adults: systematic review of evidence for
medical nutrition therapy effectiveness and
recommendations for integration into the nutrition
care process. J Acad Nutr Diet 2017;117:1659–
1679
105. Mudaliar U, Zabetian A, Goodman M, et al.
Cardiometabolic risk factor changes observed in
diabetes prevention programs in US settings: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS Med
2016;13:e1002095
106. Balk EM, Earley A, Raman G, Avendano EA,
Pittas AG, Remington PL. Combined diet and
physical activity promotion programs to prevent
type 2 diabetes among persons at increased risk:
a
systematic
review
for
the
community
preventive services task force. Ann Intern Med
2015;163:437–451
107. Hamman RF, Wing RR, Edelstein SL, et al.
Effect of weight loss with lifestyle intervention on
risk of diabetes. Diabetes Care 2006;29:2102–2107
108. Garvey WT, Ryan DH, Bohannon NJ, et al.
Weight-loss therapy in type 2 diabetes: effects of
phentermine and topiramate extended release.
Diabetes Care 2014;37:3309–3316
109. Kahan S, Fujioka K. Obesity pharmacotherapy
in patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Spectr
2017;30:250–257
110. Jeon CY, Lokken RP, Hu FB, van Dam RM.
Physical activity of moderate intensity and risk of
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review. Diabetes
Care 2007;30:744–752
111. Duncan GE, Perri MG, Theriaque DW,
Hutson AD, Eckel RH, Stacpoole PW. Exercise
training, without weight loss, increases insulin
sensitivity and postheparin plasma lipase activity
in previously sedentary adults. Diabetes Care
2003;26:557–562
112. Franz MJ, Boucher JL, Rutten-Ramos S,
VanWormer JJ. Lifestyle weight-loss intervention
outcomes in overweight and obese adults with
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomized clinical trials. J Acad Nutr
Diet 2015;115:1447–1463
113. Singh N, Stewart RAH, Benatar JR. Intensity
and duration of lifestyle interventions for long-
term weight loss and association with mortality:
a meta-analysis of randomised trials. BMJ Open
2019;9:e029966
114. Lean ME, Leslie WS, Barnes AC, et al.
Primary
care-led
weight
management
for
remission of type 2 diabetes (DiRECT): an open-
label, cluster-randomised trial. Lancet 2018;391:
541–551
115. Wing RR, Lang W, Wadden TA, et al.
Beneﬁts of modest weight loss in improving
cardiovascular risk factors in overweight and
obese individuals with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes
Care 2011;34:1481–1486
116. Wing
RR.
Does
lifestyle
intervention
improve health of adults with overweight/
obesity and type 2 diabetes? Findings from the
Look AHEAD randomized trial. Obesity (Silver
Spring) 2021;29:1246–1258
117. Garvey WT. Long-term health beneﬁts of
intensive lifestyle intervention in the Look AHEAD
study. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2021;29:1242–1243
118. Davies M, Færch L, Jeppesen OK, et al.
Semaglutide 2.4 mg once a week in adults with
overweight or obesity, and type 2 diabetes (STEP
2): a randomised, double-blind, double-dummy,
placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet 2021;
397:971–984
119. Jastreboff AM, Aronne LJ, Ahmad NN, et al.
Tirzepatide once weekly for the treatment of
obesity. N Engl J Med 2022;387:205–216
120. Garvey WT, Frias JP, Jastreboff AM, et al.
Tirzepatide once weekly for the treatment of
obesity in people with type 2 diabetes (SURMOUNT-2):
a double-blind, randomised, multicentre, placebo-
controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet 2023;402:613–626
121. Sj€ostr€om L, Peltonen M, Jacobson P, et al.
Association of bariatric surgery with long-term
remission of type 2 diabetes and with microvascular
and macrovascular complications. JAMA 2014;311:
2297–2304
122. Cefalu WT, Leiter LA, de Bruin TW, Gause-
Nilsson I, Sugg J, Parikh SJ. Dapagliﬂozin’s effects
on glycemia and cardiovascular risk factors in
high-risk patients with type 2 diabetes: a
24-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled
study
with
a
28-week
extension. Diabetes Care 2015;38:1218–1227
123. Prinz N, Schwandt A, Becker M, et al.
Trajectories of body mass index from childhood
to young adulthood among patients with type 1
diabetes-a longitudinal group-based modeling
approach based on the DPV Registry. J Pediatr
2018;201:78–85.e74
124. Lipman TH, Levitt Katz LE, Ratcliffe SJ, et al.
Increasing incidence of type 1 diabetes in youth:
twenty
years
of
the
Philadelphia
Pediatric
Diabetes Registry. Diabetes Care 2013;36:1597–
1603
125. Sumithran P, Prendergast LA, Delbridge E,
et al. Long-term persistence of hormonal adaptations
to weight loss. N Engl J Med 2011;365:1597–1604
126. Hamdy O, Mottalib A, Morsi A, et al. Long-
term effect of intensive lifestyle intervention on
cardiovascular risk factors in patients with
diabetes in real-world clinical practice: a 5-year
longitudinal study. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care
2017;5:e000259
127. Nip ASY, Reboussin BA, Dabelea D, et al.
Disordered eating behaviors in youth and young
adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes receiving
insulin therapy: the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth
study. Diabetes Care 2019;42:859–866
128. Mottalib A, Salsberg V, Mohd-Yusof BN,
et al. Effects of nutrition therapy on HbA1c and
cardiovascular disease risk factors in overweight
and obese patients with type 2 diabetes. Nutr J
2018;17:42
129. Estruch R, Ros E, Salas-Salvado J, et al.
Primary prevention of cardiovascular disease
with a Mediterranean diet supplemented with
extra-virgin olive oil or nuts. N Engl J Med
2018;378:e34
130. Saslow LR, Daubenmier JJ, Moskowitz JT,
et al. Twelve-month outcomes of a randomized
trial of a moderate-carbohydrate versus very
low-carbohydrate diet in overweight adults with
type 2 diabetes mellitus or prediabetes. Nutr
Diabetes 2017;7:304
131. Yancy WS Jr, Crowley MJ, Dar MS, et al.
Comparison of group medical visits combined
S100
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

with intensive weight management vs group
medical visits alone for glycemia in patients with
type 2 diabetes: a noninferiority randomized
clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 2020;180:70–79
132. Emadian A, Andrews RC, England CY,Wallace
V, Thompson JL. The effect of macronutrients on
glycaemic control: a systematic review of dietary
randomised controlled trials in overweight and
obese adults with type 2 diabetes in which there
was no difference in weight loss between
treatment groups. Br J Nutr 2015;114:1656–1666
133. Gardner CD, Trepanowski JF, Del Gobbo LC,
et al. Effect of low-fat vs low-carbohydrate diet
on 12-month weight loss in overweight adults
and the association with genotype pattern or
insulin
secretion:
the
DIETFITS
randomized
clinical trial. JAMA 2018;319:667–679
134. Korsmo-Haugen HK, Brurberg KG, Mann J,
Aas AM. Carbohydrate quantity in the dietary
management of type 2 diabetes: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab
2019;21:15–27
135. Te Vazquez J, Feng SN, Orr CJ, Berkowitz
SA.
Food
insecurity
and
cardiometabolic
conditions: a review of recent research. Curr Nutr
Rep 2021;10:243–254
136. Kirby JB, Bernard D, Liang L.The prevalence
of food insecurity is highest among americans for
whom diet is most critical to health. Diabetes
Care 2021;44:e131–e132
137. Hager ER, Quigg AM, Black MM, et al.
Development and validity of a 2-item screen to
identify families at risk for food insecurity.
Pediatrics 2010;126:e26–e32
138. The White House. Biden-Harris Administration
National Strategy on Hunger, Nutrition, and Health.
2022. Accessed 20 September 2023. Available from
https://www.whitehouse.gov/brieﬁng-room/
statements-releases/2022/09/27/executive-summary
-biden-harris-administration-national-strategy-on-
hunger-nutrition-and-health/
139. Evert AB, Boucher JL, Cypress M, et al.
Nutrition therapy recommendations for the
management of adults with diabetes. Diabetes
Care 2013;36:3821–3842
140. Salvia MG, Quatromoni PA. Behavioral
approaches to nutrition and eating patterns for
managing type 2 diabetes: a review. American
Journal of Medicine Open 2023;9:100034
141. Schwingshackl L, Schwedhelm C, Hoffmann
G, et al. Food groups and risk of all-cause
mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of prospective studies. Am J Clin Nutr 2017;
105:1462–1473
142. Benson G, Hayes J. An update on the
Mediterranean, vegetarian, and DASH eating
patterns in people with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes
Spectr 2020;33:125–132
143. Ge L, Sadeghirad B, Ball GDC, et al.
Comparison of dietary macronutrient patterns of
14 popular named dietary programmes for weight
and cardiovascular risk factor reduction in adults:
systematic review and network meta-analysis of
randomised trials. BMJ 2020;369:m696
144. Bonekamp NE, van Damme I, Geleijnse JM,
et al. Effect of dietary patterns on cardiovascular
risk factors in people with type 2 diabetes. A
systematic review and network meta-analysis.
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2023;195:110207
145. Builes-Montano
CE,
Ortiz-Cano
NA,
Ramirez-Rincon A, Rojas-Henao NA. Efﬁcacy and
safety of carbohydrate counting versus other
forms of dietary advice in patients with type 1
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomised clinical trials. J Hum Nutr
Diet 2022;35:1030–1042
146. Witkow S, Liberty IF, Goloub I, et al.
Simplifying carb counting: a randomized controlled
study—feasibility and efﬁcacy of an individualized,
simple,
patient-centred
carb
counting
tool.
Endocrinol Diabetes Metab 2023;6:e411
147. Haidar A, Legault L, Raffray M, et al. A
randomized crossover trial to compare auto-
mated insulin delivery (the artiﬁcial pancreas) with
carbohydrate counting or simpliﬁed qualitative
meal-size estimation in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes
Care 2023;46:1372–1378
148. Joubert M, Meyer L, Doriot A, Dreves B,
Jeandidier N, Reznik Y. Prospective independent
evaluation of the carbohydrate counting accuracy
of two smartphone applications. Diabetes Ther
2021;12:1809–1820
149. Vasiloglou MF, Mougiakakou S, Aubry E, et al.
A comparative study on carbohydrate estimation:
GoCARB vs. dietitians. Nutrients 2018;10:741
150. Bowen ME, Cavanaugh KL,Wolff K, et al.The
diabetes nutrition education study randomized
controlled trial: a comparative effectiveness study
of approaches to nutrition in diabetes self-
management education. Patient Educ Couns 2016;
99:1368–1376
151. Truman E, Lane D, Elliott C. Deﬁning food
literacy: a scoping review. Appetite 2017;116:365–
371
152. Food Literacy Center. What is food literacy?
Accessed 14 October 2023. Available from
https://www.foodliteracycenter.org/about
153. Jamshed H, Steger FL, Bryan DR, et al.
Effectiveness of early time-restricted eating for
weight loss, fat loss, and cardiometabolic health
in adults with obesity: a randomized clinical trial.
JAMA Intern Med 2022;182:953–962
154. Lowe DA, Wu N, Rohdin-Bibby L, et al.
Effects of time-restricted eating on weight loss
and other metabolic parameters in women and
men with overweight and obesity: the TREAT
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med
2020;180:1491–1499
155. Association of Diabetes Care & Education
Specialists
(ADCES).
Understanding
Health
Literacy and Numeracy 2021. Accessed 2 October
2023. Available from https://www.diabeteseducator.
org/docs/default-source/practice/educator-tools/
health-literacy-and-numeracy.pdf?sfvrsn=2
156. Gabel K, Hoddy KK, Haggerty N, et al.
Effects of 8-hour time restricted feeding on body
weight and metabolic disease risk factors in
obese adults: a pilot study. Nutr Healthy Aging
2018;4:345–353
157. Chow LS, Manoogian ENC, Alvear A, et al.
Time-restricted eating effects on body composition
and metabolic measures in humans who are
overweight: a feasibility study. Obesity (Silver
Spring) 2020;28:860–869
158. Liu D, Huang Y, Huang C, et al. Calorie
restriction with or without time-restricted eating
in weight loss. N Engl J Med 2022;386:1495–1504
159. Trepanowski JF, Kroeger CM, Barnosky A,
et al. Effect of alternate-day fasting on weight
loss, weight maintenance, and cardioprotection
among metabolically healthy obese adults: a
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med
2017;177:930–938
160. Carter S, Clifton PM, Keogh JB. Effect of
intermittent compared with continuous energy
restricted diet on glycemic control in patients
with type 2 diabetes: a randomized noninferiority
trial. JAMA Netw Open 2018;1:e180756
161. Overland J, Toth K, Gibson AA, et al. The
safety and efﬁcacy of weight loss via intermittent
fasting or standard daily energy restriction in
adults with type 1 diabetes and overweight or
obesity: a pilot study. Obes Med 2018;12:13–17
162. Lin S, Cienfuegos S, Ezpeleta M, et al. Time-
restricted eating without calorie counting for
weight loss in a racially diverse population: a
randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern Med
2023;176:885–895
163. Varady KA, Cienfuegos S, Ezpeleta M, Gabel
K. Clinical application of intermittent fasting for
weight loss: progress and future directions. Nat
Rev Endocrinol 2022;18:309–321
164. Ye W, Xu L, Ye Y, et al. The efﬁcacy and
safety of meal replacement in patients with
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2023;108:
3041–3049
165. Pi-Sunyer X.The Look AHEAD Trial: a review
and discussion of its outcomes. Curr Nutr Rep
2014;3:387–391
166. Lean MEJ, Leslie WS, Barnes AC, et al.
Durability of a primary care-led weight-management
intervention for remission of type 2 diabetes: 2-year
results of the DiRECTopen-label, cluster-randomised
trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2019;7:344–355
167. Raben A, Vestentoft PS, Brand-Miller J,
et al. The PREVIEW intervention study: results
from a 3-year randomized 2 x 2 factorial
multinational trial investigating the role of
protein, glycaemic index and physical activity for
prevention of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Obes
Metab 2021;23:324–337
168. Henry CJ, Kaur B, Quek RYC. Chrononutrition
in the management of diabetes. Nutr Diabetes
2020;10:6
169. Liu J, Yi P, Liu F. The effect of early time-
restricted eating vs later time-restricted eating
on weight loss and metabolic health. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2023;108:1824–1834
170. Wang L, Ma Q, Fang B, et al. Shift work is
associated with an increased risk of type 2
diabetes and elevated RBP4 level: cross sectional
analysis from the OHSPIW cohort study. BMC
Public Health 2023;23:1139
171. Al-Arouj M, Assaad-Khalil S, Buse J, et al.
Recommendations for management of diabetes
during Ramadan: update 2010. Diabetes Care
2010;33:1895–1902
172. Grajower MM. Management of diabetes
mellitus on Yom Kippur and other Jewish fast
days. Endocr Pract 2008;14:305–311
173. Gupta N, Gusdorf J. Guidance for Physicians
on the Yom Kippur Fast. Washington, DC,
Georgetown Medical Review, 2023
174. Saboo
B,
Joshi
S,
Shah
SN,
et
al.
Management of diabetes during fasting and
feasting in India. J Assoc Physicians India 2019;
67:70–77
175. Hassanein M, Afandi B, Yakoob Ahmedani
M, et al. Diabetes and Ramadan: practical
guidelines 2021. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2022;
185:109185
176. Yousuf S, Syed A, Ahmedani MY. To explore
the association of Ramadan fasting with symptoms
diabetesjournals.org/care
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
S101
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

of depression, anxiety, and stress in people with
diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2021;172:108545
177. Deeb A, Babiker A, Sedaghat S, et al. ISPAD
Clinical Practice Consensus Guidelines 2022:
Ramadan and other religious fasting by young
people with diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes 2020;
21:5–17
178. DAFNE Study Group. Training in ﬂexible,
intensive insulin management to enable dietary
freedom in people with type 1 diabetes: Dose
Adjustment For Normal Eating (DAFNE) randomised
controlled trial. BMJ 2002;325:746
179. Delahanty LM, Nathan DM, Lachin JM,
et al. Association of diet with glycated hemoglobin
during intensive treatment of type 1 diabetes in
the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial. Am J
Clin Nutr 2009;89:518–524
180. Kirkpatrick CF, Bolick JP, Kris-Etherton PM,
et al. Review of current evidence and clinical
recommendations
on
the
effects
of
low-
carbohydrate and very-low-carbohydrate (including
ketogenic) diets for the management of body
weight and other cardiometabolic risk factors: a
scientiﬁc
statement from
the
National
Lipid
Association Nutrition and Lifestyle Task Force. J Clin
Lipidol 2019;13:689–711.e681
181. Meng Y, Bai H, Wang S, Li Z, Wang Q, Chen
L. Efﬁcacy of low carbohydrate diet for type 2
diabetes mellitus management: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2017;131:124–131
182. Goldenberg JZ, Day A, Brinkworth GD, et al.
Efﬁcacy and
safety of low
and very low
carbohydrate diets for type 2 diabetes remission:
systematic review and meta-analysis of published
and unpublished randomized trial data. BMJ
2021;372:m4743
183. Lennerz BS, Koutnik AP, Azova S, Wolfsdorf
JI, Ludwig DS. Carbohydrate restriction for
diabetes: rediscovering centuries-old wisdom. J
Clin Invest 2021;131:e142246
184. Schwingshackl L, Chaimani A, Hoffmann G,
Schwedhelm C, Boeing H. A network meta-
analysis on the comparative efﬁcacy of different
dietary approaches on glycaemic control in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Eur J
Epidemiol 2018;33:157–170
185. Sainsbury E, Kizirian NV, Partridge SR, Gill T,
Colagiuri
S,
Gibson
AA.
Effect
of
dietary
carbohydrate restriction on glycemic control in
adults with diabetes: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2018;
139:239–252
186. van Zuuren EJ, Fedorowicz Z, Kuijpers T, Pijl
H. Effects of low-carbohydrate- compared with
low-fat-diet interventions on metabolic control in
people with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review
including GRADE assessments. Am J Clin Nutr
2018;108:300–331
187. Sacks FM, Bray GA, Carey VJ, et al.
Comparison of weight-loss diets with different
compositions of fat, protein, and carbohydrates.
N Engl J Med 2009;360:859–873
188. Tay J, Luscombe-Marsh ND, Thompson CH,
et al. Comparison of low- and high-carbohydrate
diets
for
type
2
diabetes
management:
a
randomized trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2015;102:780–790
189. Snorgaard O, Poulsen GM, Andersen HK,
Astrup A. Systematic review and meta-analysis of
dietary carbohydrate restriction in patients with
type 2 diabetes. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care
2017;5:e000354
190. Thomas D, Elliott EJ. Low glycaemic index,
or low glycaemic load, diets for diabetes mellitus.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2009;1:CD006296
191. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA
revises labels of SGLT2 inhibitors for diabetes to
include warnings about too much acid in the
blood and serious urinary tract infections. Silver
Spring, MD, U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
Accessed 14 October 2023. Available from
https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-
availability/fda-revises-labels-sglt2-inhibitors-
diabetes-include-warnings-about-too-much-acid-
blood-and-serious
192. Blau JE, Tella SH, Taylor SI, Rother KI.
Ketoacidosis associated with SGLT2 inhibitor
treatment: analysis of FAERS data. Diabetes
Metab Res Rev 2017;33:10.1002/dmrr.2924
193. Ozoran H, Matheou M, Dyson P, Karpe F,
Tan GD. Type 1 diabetes and low carbohydrate
diets-Deﬁning the degree of nutritional ketosis.
Diabet Med 2023;40:e15178
194. Cronin P, Joyce SA, O’Toole PW, O’Connor
EM. Dietary ﬁbre modulates the gut microbiota.
Nutrients 2021;13:1655
195. He M, van Dam RM, Rimm E, Hu FB, Qi L.
Whole-grain, cereal ﬁber, bran, and germ intake
and the risks of all-cause and cardiovascular
disease-speciﬁc mortality among women with
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Circulation 2010;121:
2162–2168
196. Burger KN, Beulens JW, van der Schouw YT,
et al. Dietary ﬁber, carbohydrate quality and
quantity, and mortality risk of individuals with
diabetes mellitus. PLoS One 2012;7:e43127
197. Partula V, Deschasaux M, Druesne-Pecollo
N, et al. Associations between consumption of
dietary ﬁbers and the risk of cardiovascular
diseases, cancers, type 2 diabetes, and mortality
in the prospective NutriNet-Sante cohort. Am J
Clin Nutr 2020;112:195–207
198. Reynolds A, Mann J, Cummings J,Winter N,
Mete E, Te Morenga L. Carbohydrate quality and
human health: a series of systematic reviews and
meta-analyses. Lancet 2019;393:434–445
199. Hu Y, Ding M, Sampson L, et al. Intake of
whole grain foods and risk of type 2 diabetes:
results from three prospective cohort studies.
BMJ 2020;370:m2206
200. Nansel TR, Lipsky LM, Liu A. Greater diet
quality is associated with more optimal glycemic
control in a longitudinal study of youth with
type 1 diabetes. Am J Clin Nutr 2016;104:81–87
201. Katz ML, Mehta S, Nansel T, Quinn H,
Lipsky LM, Laffel LM. Associations of nutrient
intake with glycemic control in youth with type 1
diabetes:
differences
by
insulin
regimen.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2014;16:512–518
202. Zafar MI, Mills KE, Zheng J, et al. Low-
glycemic index diets as an intervention for
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Am J Clin Nutr 2019;110:891–902
203. Wheeler ML, Dunbar SA, Jaacks LM, et al.
Macronutrients, food groups, and eating patterns
in the management of diabetes: a systematic
review of the literature, 2010. Diabetes Care
2012;35:434–445
204. Vega-Lopez S, Venn BJ, Slavin JL. Relevance
of the glycemic index and glycemic load for body
weight, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease.
Nutrients 2018;10:1361
205. Chiavaroli L, Lee D, Ahmed A, et al. Effect of
low glycaemic index or load dietary patterns on
glycaemic
control
and
cardiometabolic
risk
factors in diabetes: systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ
2021;374:n1651
206. Rossi MC, Nicolucci A, Di Bartolo P, et al.
Diabetes Interactive Diary: a new telemedicine
system enabling ﬂexible diet and insulin therapy
while improving quality of life: an open-label,
international, multicenter, randomized study.
Diabetes Care 2010;33:109–115
207. Laurenzi A, Bolla AM, Panigoni G, et al.
Effects of carbohydrate counting on glucose
control and quality of life over 24 weeks in adult
patients with type 1 diabetes on continuous
subcutaneous insulin infusion: a randomized,
prospective clinical trial (GIOCAR). Diabetes Care
2011;34:823–827
208. S€amann A, M€uhlhauser I, Bender R, Kloos
C, M€uller UA. Glycaemic control and severe
hypoglycaemia following training in ﬂexible,
intensive insulin therapy to enable dietary
freedom in people with type 1 diabetes: a
prospective implementation study. Diabetologia
2005;48:1965–1970
209. Bell KJ, Smart CE, Steil GM, Brand-Miller JC,
King B, Wolpert HA. Impact of fat, protein, and
glycemic index on postprandial glucose control
in type 1 diabetes: implications for intensive
diabetes management in the continuous glucose
monitoring era. Diabetes Care 2015;38:1008–
1015
210. Bell KJ, Toschi E, Steil GM, Wolpert HA.
Optimized mealtime insulin dosing for fat and
protein in type 1 diabetes: application of a
model-based approach to derive insulin doses for
open-loop diabetes management. Diabetes Care
2016;39:1631–1634
211. Smart CE, Evans M, O’Connell SM, et al.
Both dietary protein and fat increase post-
prandial glucose excursions in children with type 1
diabetes, and the effect is additive. Diabetes Care
2013;36:3897–3902
212. Smith TA, Smart CE, Howley PP, Lopez PE,
King BR. For a high fat, high protein breakfast,
preprandial administration of 125% of the insulin
dose improves postprandial glycaemic excursions
in people with type 1 diabetes using multiple
daily injections: a cross-over trial. Diabet Med
2021;38:e14512
213. Paterson MA, Smart CEM, Lopez PE, et al.
Increasing the protein quantity in a meal results
in
dose-dependent
effects
on
postprandial
glucose levels in individuals with type 1 diabetes
mellitus. Diabet Med 2017;34:851–854
214. O’Connell SM, O’Toole N, Cronin C, et al. Is
the glycaemic response from fat in meals dose
dependent in children and adolescents with
T1DM on intensive insulin therapy? In ESPE
Abstracts 2018. Bristol, U.K., European Society
for Paediatric Endocrinology, p. FC3.4
215. Bell KJ, Fio CZ, Twigg S, et al. Amount and
type of dietary fat, postprandial glycemia, and
insulin requirements in type 1 diabetes: a
randomized within-subject trial. Diabetes Care
2020;43:59–66
216. Furthner D, Lukas A, Schneider AM, et al.
The role of protein and fat intake on insulin
therapy in glycaemic control of paediatric type 1
diabetes: a systematic review and research gaps.
Nutrients 2021;13:3558
217. Kaya N, Kurtoglu S, G€okmen €Ozel H. Does
meal-time insulin dosing based on fat-protein
S102
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

counting give positive results in postprandial
glycaemic proﬁle after a high protein-fat meal in
adolescents with type 1 diabetes: a randomised
controlled trial. J Hum Nutr Diet 2020;33:
396–403
218. Al Balwi R, Al Madani W, Al Ghamdi A.
Efﬁcacy of insulin dosing algorithms for high-fat
high-protein mixed meals to control postprandial
glycemic excursions in people living with type 1
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Pediatr Diabetes 2022;23:1635–1646
219. Metwally M, Cheung TO, Smith R, Bell KJ.
Insulin pump dosing strategies for meals varying
in fat, protein or glycaemic index or grazing-style
meals in type 1 diabetes: a systematic review.
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2021;172:108516
220. Campbell MD, Walker M, King D, et al.
Carbohydrate counting at meal time followed by
a small secondary postprandial bolus injection at
3 hours prevents late hyperglycemia, without
hypoglycemia, after a high-carbohydrate, high-fat
meal in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2016;
39:e141–e142
221. Angelopoulos T, Kokkinos A, Liaskos C, et al.
The effect of slow spaced eating on hunger and
satiety in overweight and obese patients with
type 2 diabetes mellitus. BMJ Open Diabetes Res
Care 2014;2:e000013
222. Phillip M, Nimri R, Bergenstal RM, et al.
Consensus recommendations for the use of
automated
insulin
delivery
technologies
in
clinical practice. Endocr Rev 2023;44:254–280
223. Tuttle KR, Bakris GL, Bilous RW, et al.
Diabetic kidney disease: a report from an ADA
Consensus Conference. Diabetes Care 2014;37:
2864–2883
224. Ley SH, Hamdy O, Mohan V, Hu FB.
Prevention and management of type 2 diabetes:
dietary components and nutritional strategies.
Lancet 2014;383:1999–2007
225. Pan Y, Guo LL, Jin HM. Low-protein diet for
diabetic nephropathy: a meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Am J Clin Nutr 2008;88:
660–666
226. Robertson L, Waugh N, Robertson A.
Protein restriction for diabetic renal disease.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007;4:CD002181
227. de Boer IH, Khunti K, Sadusky T, et al.
Diabetes management in chronic kidney disease:
a consensus report by the American Diabetes
Association (ADA) and Kidney Disease: Improving
Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Diabetes Care 2022;
45:3075–3090
228. Sun
Y,
Liu
B,
Snetselaar
LG,
et
al.
Association of major dietary protein sources with
all-cause and cause-speciﬁc mortality: prospective
cohort study. J Am Heart Assoc 2021;10:e015553
229. Viguiliouk E, Stewart SE, Jayalath VH, et al.
Effect of replacing animal protein with plant
protein
on
glycemic
control
in
diabetes:
a
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Nutrients 2015;7:9804–9824
230. Willett W, Rockstr€om J, Loken B, et al. Food
in the Anthropocene: the EAT-Lancet Commission
on healthy diets from sustainable food systems.
Lancet 2019;393:447–492
231. Ros E. Dietary cis-monounsaturated fatty
acids and metabolic control in type 2 diabetes.
Am J Clin Nutr 2003;78:617S–625S
232. Forouhi NG, Imamura F, Sharp SJ, et al.
Association of plasma phospholipid n-3 and n-6
polyunsaturated fatty acids with type 2 diabetes:
the EPIC-InterAct case-cohort study. PLoS Med
2016;13:e1002094
233. Wang DD, Li Y, Chiuve SE, et al. Association
of speciﬁc dietary fats with total and cause-
speciﬁc mortality. JAMA Intern Med 2016;176:
1134–1145
234. Brehm BJ, Lattin BL, Summer SS, et al. One-
year comparison of a high-monounsaturated fat
diet with a high-carbohydrate diet in type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2009;32:215–220
235. Shai I, Schwarzfuchs D, Henkin Y, et al.
Weight loss with a low-carbohydrate, Mediterranean,
or low-fatdiet. N Engl J Med 2008;359:229–241
236. Brunerova L, Smejkalova V, Potockova J,
Andel M. A comparison of the inﬂuence of a
high-fat diet enriched in monounsaturated fatty
acids and conventional diet on weight loss and
metabolic parameters in obese non-diabetic and
type 2 diabetic patients. Diabet Med 2007;24:
533–540
237. Bloomﬁeld
HE,
Koeller
E,
Greer
N,
MacDonald R, Kane R, Wilt TJ. Effects on health
outcomes of a Mediterranean diet with no
restriction on fat intake: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 2016;165:491–
500
238. Sacks FM, Lichtenstein AH, Wu JHY, et al.
Dietary
fats
and
cardiovascular
disease:
a
presidential advisory from the American Heart
Association. Circulation 2017;136:e1–e23
239. Jacobson TA, Maki KC, Orringer CE, et al.
National Lipid Association recommendations for
patient-centered management of dyslipidemia:
part 2. J Clin Lipidol 2015;9:S1–S122.e1
240. Holman RR, Paul S, Farmer A, Tucker L,
Stratton IM, Neil HA. Atorvastatin in Factorial
with Omega-3 EE90 Risk Reduction in Diabetes
(AFORRD): a randomised controlled trial. Dia-
betologia 2009;52:50–59
241. Bosch J, Gerstein HC, Dagenais GR, et al. n-
3 fatty acids and cardiovascular outcomes in
patients with dysglycemia. N Engl J Med 2012;
367:309–318
242. Brown TJ, Brainard J, Song F, Wang X,
Abdelhamid A, Hooper L. Omega-3, omega-6, and
total dietary polyunsaturated fat for prevention
and treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus:
systematic review and meta-analysis of ran-
domised controlled trials. BMJ 2019;366:l4697
243. Bowman L, Mafham M, Wallendszus K,
et al. Effects of n-3 fatty acid supplements in
diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med 2018;379:
1540–1550
244. Bhatt DL, Steg PG, Miller M, et al.
Cardiovascular risk reduction with icosapent
ethyl for hypertriglyceridemia. N Engl J Med
2019;380:11–22
245. Thomas MC, Moran J, Forsblom C, et al.
The association between dietary sodium intake,
ESRD, and all-cause mortality in patients with
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2011;34:861–866
246. Ekinci EI, Clarke S, Thomas MC, et al.
Dietary salt intake and mortality in patients with
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2011;34:703–709
247. Lennon SL, DellaValle DM, Rodder SG, et al.
2015 Evidence analysis library evidence-based
nutrition practice guideline for the management
of hypertension in adults. J Acad Nutr Diet 2017;
117:1445–1458.e1417
248. Maillot
M,
Drewnowski
A.
A
conﬂict
between nutritionally adequate diets and meeting
the 2010 dietary guidelines for sodium. Am J Prev
Med 2012;42:174–179
249. Dietary Guidelines for America Committee.
Scientiﬁc Report of the 2020 Dietary Guidelines
Advisory Committee: Advisory Report to the
Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of
Health and Human Services. Washington, DC,
Agricultural Research Service, 2020
250. Hannon BA, Fairﬁeld WD, Adams B, Kyle T,
Crow M, Thomas DM. Use and abuse of dietary
supplements in persons with diabetes. Nutr
Diabetes 2020;10:14
251. Kazemi A, Ryul Shim S, Jamali N, et al.
Comparison
of
nutritional
supplements
for
glycemic control in type 2 diabetes: a systematic
review and network meta-analysis of randomized
trials. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2022;191:110037
252. National Center for Complementary and
Integrative Health. Dietary and Herbal Supplements.
Accessed 1 October 2023. Available from https://
www.nccih.nih.gov/health/dietary-and-herbal
-supplements
253. Mangione CM, Barry MJ, Nicholson WK,
et
al.
Vitamin,
mineral,
and
multivitamin
supplementation
to
prevent
cardiovascular
disease and cancer: US Preventive Services Task
Force recommendation statement. JAMA 2022;
327:2326–2333
254. Allen RW, Schwartzman E, Baker WL,
Coleman CI, Phung OJ. Cinnamon use in type 2
diabetes: an updated systematic review and
meta-analysis. Ann Fam Med 2013;11:452–459
255. Mitri J, Pittas AG. Vitamin D and diabetes.
Endocrinol
Metab Clin North Am
2014;43:
205–232
256. Mozaffarian D. Dietary and policy priorities
for cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and obesity:
a comprehensive review. Circulation 2016;133:
187–225
257. Pittas AG, Dawson-Hughes B, Sheehan P,
et al. Vitamin D supplementation and prevention
of type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;381:520–
530
258. Kawahara T, Suzuki G, Mizuno S, et al.
Effect
of
active
vitamin
D
treatment
on
development of type 2 diabetes: DPVD randomised
controlled trial in Japanese population. BMJ
2022;377:e066222
259. Dawson-Hughes B, Staten MA, Knowler
WC, et al. Intratrial exposure to vitamin D and
new-onset diabetes among adults with pre-
diabetes: a secondary analysis from the Vitamin D
and Type 2 Diabetes (D2d) study. Diabetes Care
2020;43:2916–2922
260. Zhang Y, Tan H, Tang J, et al. Effects of
vitamin D supplementation on prevention of
type 2 diabetes in patients with prediabetes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes
Care 2020;43:1650–1658
261. Barbarawi M, Zayed Y, Barbarawi O, et al.
Effect of vitamin D supplementation on the
incidence of diabetes mellitus. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2020;105:dgaa335
262. Aroda VR, Edelstein SL, Goldberg RB, et al.
Long-term metformin use and vitamin B12
deﬁciency in the Diabetes Prevention Program
Outcomes Study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;
101:1754–1761
263. Infante M, Leoni M, Caprio M, Fabbri A.
Long-term metformin therapy and vitamin B12
deﬁciency: an association to bear in mind. World
J Diabetes 2021;12:916–931
diabetesjournals.org/care
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
S103
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

264. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Dietary
Supplement Ingredient Directory. Accessed 2
October 2023. Available from https://www.fda.
gov/food/dietary-supplements/dietary-supplement-
ingredient-directory
265. Biesalski HK, Tinz J. Multivitamin/mineral
supplements: rationale and safety—a systematic
review. Nutrition 2017;33:76–82
266. Anderson BO, Berdzuli N, Ilbawi A, et al.
Health and cancer risks associated with low
levels of alcohol consumption. Lancet Public
Health 2023;8:e6–e7
267. Weitzman ER, Wisk LE, Minegishi M, et al.
Effects of a patient-centered intervention to
reduce alcohol use among youth with chronic
medical conditions. J Adolesc Health 2022;71:
S24–s33
268. National Agricultural Library, U.S. Department
of Agriculture. Nutritive and nonnutritive sweetener
resources. Accessed 14 October 2023. Available
from
https://www.nal.usda.gov/human-nutrition-
and-food-safety/food-composition/sweeteners
269. Farhat
G,
Dewison
F,
Stevenson
L.
Knowledge and perceptions of non-nutritive
sweeteners within the UK adult population.
Nutrients 2021;13:444
270. World Health Organization. Use of non-
sugar sweeteners: WHO guideline.
Geneva,
Switzerland,World Health Organization, 2023
271. Witkowski M, Nemet I, Alamri H, et al. The
artiﬁcial sweetener erythritol and cardiovascular
event risk. Nat Med 2023;29:710–718
272. Riboli E, Beland FA, Lachenmeier DW, et al.
Carcinogenicity of aspartame, methyleugenol,
and isoeugenol. Lancet Oncol 2023;24:848–850
273. Nobs SP, Elinav E. Nonnutritive sweeteners
and glucose intolerance: where do we go from
here? J Clin Invest 2023;133:e171057
274. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al.
2019
ACC/AHA
guideline
on
the
primary
prevention of cardiovascular disease: a report of
the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice
Guidelines. Circulation 2019;140:e596–e646
275. Johnson RK, Lichtenstein AH, Anderson
CAM, et al. Low-calorie sweetened beverages
and cardiometabolic health: a science advisory
from the American Heart Association. Circulation
2018;138:e126–e140
276. Grotz VL, Pi-Sunyer X, Porte D Jr, Roberts A,
Richard Trout J. A 12-week randomized clinical
trial investigating the potential for sucralose to
affect
glucose
homeostasis.
Regul
Toxicol
Pharmacol 2017;88:22–33
277. Lohner S, Kuellenberg de Gaudry D,Toews I,
Ferenci T, Meerpohl JJ. Non-nutritive sweeteners
for diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2020;5:CD012885
278. Sylvetsky AC, Chandran A, Talegawkar SA,
Welsh JA, Drews K, El Ghormli L. Consumption of
beverages containing low-calorie sweeteners,
diet, and cardiometabolic health in youth with
type 2 diabetes. J Acad Nutr Diet 2020;120:1348–
1358.e6
279. Miller PE, Perez V. Low-calorie sweeteners
and body weight and composition: a meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials and
prospective cohort studies. Am J Clin Nutr 2014;
100:765–777
280. Rogers PJ, Hogenkamp PS, de Graaf C, et al.
Does low-energy sweetener consumption affect
energy intake and body weight? A systematic
review, including meta-analyses, of the evidence
from human and animal studies. Int J Obes
2016;40:381–394
281. Laviada-Molina H, Molina-Segui F, Perez-
Gaxiola
G,
et
al.
Effects
of
nonnutritive
sweeteners on body weight and BMI in diverse
clinical contexts: systematic review and meta-
analysis. Obes Rev 2020;21:e13020
282. Azad MB, Abou-Setta AM, Chauhan BF, et al.
Nonnutritive
sweeteners
and
cardiometabolic
health: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials and prospective
cohort studies. CMAJ 2017;189:E929–E939
283. Lee JJ, Khan TA, McGlynn N, et al. Relation
of change or substitution of low- and no-calorie
sweetened
beverages
with
cardiometabolic
outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of prospective cohort studies. Diabetes Care
2022;45:1917–1930
284. Mattes
RD,
Popkin
BM.
Nonnutritive
sweetener consumption in humans: effects on
appetite and food intake and their putative
mechanisms. Am J Clin Nutr 2009;89:1–14
285. McGlynn ND, Khan TA, Wang L, et al.
Association of low- and no-calorie sweetened
beverages as a replacement for sugar-sweetened
beverages with body weight and cardiometabolic
risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
JAMA Netw Open 2022;5:e222092
286. 2018 Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory
Committee. 2018 Physical activity Guidelines
Advisory Committee Scientiﬁc Report.Washington,
DC, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, 2018
287. Bazargan-Hejazi S, Arroyo JS, Hsia S, Brojeni
NR, Pan D. A racial comparison of differences
between self-reported and objectively measured
physical activity among US adults with diabetes.
Ethn Dis 2017;27:403–410
288. Khunti K, Grifﬁn S, Brennan A, et al.
Behavioural interventions to promote physical
activity in a multiethnic population at high risk of
diabetes: PROPELS three-arm RCT. Health Technol
Assess 2021;25:1–190
289. Bootwong P, Intarut N. The effects of text
messages for promoting physical activities in
prediabetes:
a
randomized
controlled
trial.
Telemed J E Health 2022;28:896–903
290. Sluik D, Buijsse B, Muckelbauer R, et al.
Physical activity and mortality in individuals with
diabetes mellitus: a prospective study and meta-
analysis. Arch Intern Med 2012;172:1285–1295
291. Tikkanen-Dolenc H, Waden J, Forsblom C,
et al. Physical activity reduces risk of premature
mortality in patients with type 1 diabetes with
and without kidney disease. Diabetes Care 2017;
40:1727–1732
292. Boule NG, Haddad E, Kenny GP, Wells GA,
Sigal RJ. Effects of exercise on glycemic control
and body mass in type 2 diabetes mellitus: a
meta-analysis of controlled clinical trials. JAMA
2001;286:1218–1227
293. Peters AL, Laffel L. The American Diabetes
Association/JDRF Type 1 Diabetes Sourcebook.
Arlington, VA, American Diabetes Association,
2013
294. Ostman C, Jewiss D, King N, Smart NA.
Clinical outcomes to exercise training in type 1
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2018;139:380–391
295. Boule NG, Kenny GP, Haddad E, Wells GA,
Sigal RJ. Meta-analysis of the effect of structured
exercise training on cardiorespiratory ﬁtness in
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Diabetologia 2003;
46:1071–1081
296. Rejeski WJ, Ip EH, Bertoni AG, et al.
Lifestyle change and mobility in obese adults
with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2012;366:
1209–1217
297. Colberg SR, Sigal RJ, Yardley JE, et al.
Physical activity/exercise and diabetes: a position
statement of the American Diabetes Association.
Diabetes Care 2016;39:2065–2079
298. Frediani JK, Bienvenida AF, Li J, Higgins MK,
Lobelo F. Physical ﬁtness and activity changes
after a 24-week soccer-based adaptation of the
U.S diabetes prevention program intervention in
Hispanic men. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 2020;63:
775–785
299. Janssen I, Leblanc AG. Systematic review of
the health beneﬁts of physical activity and ﬁtness
in school-aged children and youth. Int J Behav
Nutr Phys Act 2010;7:40
300. Patience M, Janssen X, Kirk A, et al. 24-
Hour movement behaviours (physical activity,
sedentary behaviour and sleep) association with
glycaemic control and psychosocial outcomes in
adolescents with type 1 diabetes: a systematic
review of quantitative and qualitative studies. Int
J Environ Res Public Health 2023;20:4363
301. Riddell MC, Gallen IW, Smart CE, et al.
Exercise management in type 1 diabetes: a
consensus statement. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
2017;5:377–390
302. Anderson BJ, Laffel LM, Domenger C, et al.
Factors associated with diabetes-speciﬁc health-
related quality of life in youth with type 1
diabetes: the Global TEENs Study. Diabetes Care
2017;40:1002–1009
303. Adolfsson P, Riddell MC, Taplin CE, et al.
ISPAD clinical practice consensus guidelines
2018: exercise in children and adolescents with
diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes 2018;19(Suppl. 27):
205–226
304. Armstrong M, Colberg SR, Sigal RJ. Where
to start? Physical assessment, readiness, and
exercise recommendations for people with type 1
or type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Spectr 2023;36:105–
113
305. Jelleyman C, Yates T, O’Donovan G, et al.
The effects of high-intensity interval training on
glucose regulation and insulin resistance: a meta-
analysis. Obes Rev 2015;16:942–961
306. Little JP, Gillen JB, Percival ME, et al. Low-
volume high-intensity interval training reduces
hyperglycemia and increases muscle mitochondrial
capacity in patients with type 2 diabetes. J Appl
Physiol 1985;2011:1554–1560
307. Bohn B, Herbst A, Pfeifer M, et al. Impact of
physical
activity
on
glycemic
control
and
prevalence of cardiovascular risk factors in adults
with type 1 diabetes: a cross-sectional multicenter
study of 18,028 patients. Diabetes Care 2015;
38:1536–1543
308. U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans,
2nd edition. Washington, DC, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, 2018
309. Willey KA, Singh MA. Battling insulin
resistance in elderly obese people with type 2
diabetes: bring on the heavy weights. Diabetes
Care 2003;26:1580–1588
310. Katzmarzyk
PT,
Church
TS,
Craig
CL,
Bouchard C. Sitting time and mortality from all
S104
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

causes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer. Med
Sci Sports Exerc 2009;41:998–1005
311. Dempsey PC, Larsen RN, Sethi P, et al.
Beneﬁts for type 2 diabetes of interrupting
prolonged sitting with brief bouts of light walking
or simple resistance activities. Diabetes Care
2016;39:964–972
312. Wang Y, Lee DC, Brellenthin AG, et al.
Leisure-time running reduces the risk of incident
type 2 diabetes. Am J Med 2019;132:1225–1232
313. Schellenberg ES, Dryden DM, Vandermeer
B, Ha C, Korownyk C. Lifestyle interventions for
patients with and at risk for type 2 diabetes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern
Med 2013;159:543–551
314. Pai LW, Li TC, Hwu YJ, Chang SC, Chen LL,
Chang PY. The effectiveness of regular leisure-
time physical activities on long-term glycemic
control in people with type 2 diabetes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes
Res Clin Pract 2016;113:77–85
315. Cui J, Yan JH, Yan LM, Pan L, Le JJ, Guo YZ.
Effects of yoga in adults with type 2 diabetes
mellitus: A meta-analysis. J Diabetes Investig
2017;8:201–209
316. Lee MS, Jun JH, Lim HJ, Lim HS. A
systematic review and meta-analysis of tai chi for
treating type 2 diabetes. Maturitas 2015;80:
14–23
317. Rees JL, Johnson ST, Boule NG. Aquatic
exercise for adults with type 2 diabetes: a meta-
analysis. Acta Diabetol 2017;54:895–904
318. Mohammad Rahimi GR, Aminzadeh R,
Azimkhani A, Saatchian V. The effect of exercise
interventions to improve psychosocial aspects
and glycemic control in type 2 diabetic patients:
a
systematic
review
and
meta-analysis
of
randomized controlled trials. Biol Res Nurs 2022;
24:10–23
319. Church TS, Blair SN, Cocreham S, et al.
Effects of aerobic and resistance training on
hemoglobin A1c levels in patients with type 2
diabetes: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA
2010;304:2253–2262
320. Kanaley JA, Colberg SR, Corcoran MH, et al.
Exercise/physical activity in individuals with
type 2 diabetes: a consensus statement from
the American College of Sports Medicine. Med
Sci Sports Exerc 2022;54:353–368
321. Gillen JB, Little JP, Punthakee Z, Tarnopolsky
MA, Riddell MC, Gibala MJ. Acute high-intensity
interval exercise reduces the postprandial glucose
response and prevalence of hyperglycaemia in
patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Obes
Metab 2012;14:575–577
322. Riddell MC, Peters AL. Exercise in adults
with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Nat Rev Endocrinol
2023;19:98–111
323. Grace A, Chan E, Giallauria F, Graham PL,
Smart NA. Clinical outcomes and glycaemic
responses to different aerobic exercise training
intensities in type II diabetes: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Cardiovasc Diabetol 2017;
16:37
324. Bax JJ, Young LH, Frye RL, Bonow RO,
Steinberg HO, Barrett EJ. Screening for coronary
artery disease in patients with diabetes. Diabetes
Care 2007;30:2729–2736
325. Moser O, Riddell MC, Eckstein ML, et al.
Glucose management for exercise using continuous
glucose monitoring (CGM) and intermittently
scanned CGM (isCGM) systems in type 1 diabetes:
position statement of the European Association for
the
Study of
Diabetes
(EASD)
and
of
the
International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent
Diabetes (ISPAD) endorsed by JDRF and supported
by the American Diabetes Association (ADA).
Diabetologia 2020;63:2501–2520
326. Rietz M, Lehr A, Mino E, et al. Physical
activity
and
risk of
major
diabetes-related
complications in individuals with diabetes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of observational
studies. Diabetes Care 2022;45:3101–3111
327. Colberg SR. Exercise and Diabetes: A
Clinician’s Guide to Prescribing Physical Activity.
Arlington, VA, American Diabetes Association,
2013
328. Lemaster
JW,
Reiber
GE,
Smith
DG,
Heagerty PJ, Wallace C. Daily weight-bearing
activity does not increase the risk of diabetic foot
ulcers. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2003;35:1093–1099
329. Smith AG, Russell J, Feldman EL, et al.
Lifestyle intervention for pre-diabetic neuropathy.
Diabetes Care 2006;29:1294–1299
330. Spallone V, Ziegler D, Freeman R, et al.
Cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy in diabetes:
clinical
impact,
assessment,
diagnosis,
and
management. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2011;27:
639–653
331. Pop-Busui R, Evans GW, Gerstein HC, et al.
Effects of cardiac autonomic dysfunction on
mortality
risk
in
the
Action
to
Control
Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes (ACCORD) trial.
Diabetes Care 2010;33:1578–1584
332. National
Center
for
Chronic
Disease
Prevention and Health Promotion (US) Ofﬁce on
Smoking and Health.The health consequences of
smoking—50 years of progress: a report of the
Surgeon General. In Reports of the Surgeon
General. Atlanta, GA, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, 2014
333. Durlach V, Verges B, Al-Salameh A, et al.
Smoking and diabetes interplay: a comprehensive
review and joint statement. Diabetes Metab
2022;48:101370
334. Sliwinska-Mosson M, Milnerowicz H. The
impact of smoking on the development of
diabetes and its complications. Diab Vasc Dis Res
2017;14:265–276
335. Kar
D,
Gillies
C,
Zaccardi
F,
et
al.
Relationship of cardiometabolic parameters in
non-smokers, current smokers, and quitters in
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Cardiovasc Diabetol 2016;15:158
336. Pan A, Wang Y, Talaei M, Hu FB. Relation of
smoking with total mortality and cardiovascular
events among patients with diabetes mellitus: a
meta-analysis and systematic review. Circulation
2015;132:1795–1804
337. Pan A, Wang Y, Talaei M, Hu FB, Wu T.
Relation of active, passive, and quitting smoking
with incident type 2 diabetes: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
2015;3:958–967
338. Jankowich M, Choudhary G,Taveira TH,Wu
WC. Age-, race-, and gender-speciﬁc prevalence
of diabetes among smokers. Diabetes Res Clin
Pract 2011;93:e101–e105
339. Akter S, Goto A, Mizoue T. Smoking and the
risk of type 2 diabetes in Japan: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Epidemiol 2017;
27:553–561
340. Liu X, Bragg F, Yang L, et al. Smoking and
smoking cessation in relation to risk of diabetes
in Chinese men and women: a 9-year prospective
study of 0·5 million people. Lancet Public Health
2018;3:e167–e176
341. U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. Smoking cessation: a report of the
Surgeon General. 2020. Accessed 1 September
2023. Available from https://www.hhs.gov/sites/
default/ﬁles/2020-cessation-sgr-full-report.pdf
342. Loretan CG, Cornelius ME, Jamal A, Cheng
YJ, Homa DM. Cigarette smoking among US
adults with selected chronic diseases associated
with smoking, 2010-2019. Prev Chronic Dis 2022;
19:E62
343. Fiore MC, Jaen CR, Baker TB, et al. Treating
tobacco use and dependence: 2008 update US
Public Health Service Clinical Practice Guideline
executive summary. Respir Care 2008;53:1217–
1222
344. Rigotti NA, Kruse GR, Livingstone-Banks J,
Hartmann-Boyce
J.
Treatment
of
tobacco
smoking: a review. JAMA 2022;327:566–577
345. Krist AH, Davidson KW, et al.; US Preventive
Services Task Force. Interventions for tobacco
smoking cessation in adults, including pregnant
persons: US Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. JAMA 2021;325:
265–279
346. Tian J, Venn A, Otahal P, Gall S. The
association
between
quitting
smoking
and
weight gain: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of prospective cohort studies. Obes Rev
2015;16:883–901
347. Voulgari C, Katsilambros N, Tentolouris N.
Smoking
cessation
predicts
amelioration
of
microalbuminuria in newly diagnosed type 2
diabetes mellitus: a 1-year prospective study.
Metabolism 2011;60:1456–1464
348. Piano MR, Benowitz NL, Fitzgerald GA,
et al. Impact of smokeless tobacco products on
cardiovascular disease: implications for policy,
prevention, and treatment: a policy statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation
2010;122:1520–1544
349. Huerta TR, Walker DM, Mullen D, Johnson
TJ, Ford EW. Trends in E-cigarette awareness and
perceived harmfulness in the U.S. Am J Prev Med
2017;52:339–346
350. Pericot-Valverde I, Gaalema DE, Priest JS,
Higgins ST. E-cigarette awareness, perceived
harmfulness, and ever use among U.S. adults.
Prev Med 2017;104:92–99
351. Kiernan E, Click ES, Melstrom P, et al. A
brief overview of the national outbreak of e-
cigarette, or vaping, product use-associated lung
injury and the primary causes. Chest 2021;
159:426–431
352. Darville
A,
Hahn EJ.
E-cigarettes and
atherosclerotic
cardiovascular
disease:
what
clinicians and researchers need to know. Curr
Atheroscler Rep 2019;21:15
353. Assaf
RD,
Gorbach
PM,
Cooper
ZD.
Changes in medical and non-medical cannabis
use among United States adults before and
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Am J Drug
Alcohol Abuse 2022;48:321–327
354. Hasin D, Walsh C.Trends over time in adult
cannabis use: a review of recent ﬁndings. Curr
Opin Psychol 2021;38:80–85
355. Freeman TP, Craft S, Wilson J, et al.
Changes in delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
and cannabidiol (CBD) concentrations in cannabis
diabetesjournals.org/care
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
S105
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

over time: systematic review and meta-analysis.
Addiction 2021;116:1000–1010
356. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 5
Things to Know about Delta-8 Tetrahydroca-
nnabinol–Delta-8 THC. Accessed 6 June 2023.
Available from https://www.fda.gov/consumers/
consumer-updates/5-things-know-about-delta-8-
tetrahydrocannabinol-delta-8-thc
357. Akturk HK, Taylor DD, Camsari UM, Rewers
A, Kinney GL, Shah VN. Association between
cannabis use and risk for diabetic ketoacidosis in
adults with type 1 diabetes. JAMA Intern Med
2019;179:115–118
358. Kinney GL, Akturk HK,Taylor DD, Foster NC,
Shah VN. Cannabis use is associated with
increased risk for diabetic ketoacidosis in adults
with type 1 diabetes: ﬁndings from the T1D
Exchange Clinic Registry. Diabetes Care 2020;
43:247–249
359. Akturk HK, Snell-Bergeon J, Kinney GL,
Champakanath A, Monte A, Shah VN. Differentiating
diabetic ketoacidosis and hyperglycemic ketosis due
to cannabis hyperemesis syndrome in adults with
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2022;45:481–483
360. Reid RD, Malcolm J, Wooding E, et al.
Prospective, cluster-randomized trial to implement
the ottawa model for smoking cessation in
diabetes education programs in Ontario, Canada.
Diabetes Care 2018;41:406–412
361. Hood KK, Peterson CM, Rohan JM, Drotar
D. Association between adherence and glycemic
control in pediatric type 1 diabetes: a meta-
analysis. Pediatrics 2009;124:e1171–e1179
362. Asche C, LaFleur J, Conner C. A review
of
diabetes
treatment
adherence
and
the
association with clinical and economic outcomes.
Clin Ther 2011;33:74–109
363. Hood KK, Rohan JM, Peterson CM, Drotar
D.
Interventions
with
adherence-promoting
components in pediatric type 1 diabetes: meta-
analysis of their impact on glycemic control.
Diabetes Care 2010;33:1658–1664
364. Hilliard ME, Powell PW, Anderson BJ.
Evidence-based
behavioral
interventions
to
promote diabetes management in children,
adolescents, and families. Am Psychol 2016;
71:590–601
365. Hood KK, Hilliard M, Piatt G, Ievers-Landis
CE. Effective strategies for encouraging behavior
change in people with diabetes. Diabetes Manag
(Lond) 2015;5:499–510
366. Berhe KK, Gebru HB, Kahsay HB. Effect of
motivational
interviewing
intervention
on
HgbA1C and depression in people with type 2
diabetes mellitus (systematic review and meta-
analysis). PLoS One 2020;15:e0240839
367. Powell PW, Hilliard ME, Anderson BJ.
Motivational interviewing to promote adherence
behaviors in pediatric type 1 diabetes. Curr Diab
Rep 2014;14:531
368. Liang W, Lo SHS, Tola YO, Chow KM. The
effectiveness of self-management programmes
for people with type 2 diabetes receiving insulin
injection: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Int J Clin Pract 2021;75:e14636
369. Almutairi N, Hosseinzadeh H, Gopaldasani
V.
The
effectiveness
of
patient
activation
intervention on type 2 diabetes mellitus glycemic
control
and
self-management
behaviors:
a
systematic review of RCTs. Prim Care Diabetes
2020;14:12–20
370. Rosales CB, Denman CA, Bell ML, et al.
Meta Salud Diabetes for cardiovascular disease
prevention in Mexico: a cluster-randomized
behavioural clinical trial. Int J Epidemiol 2021;
50:1272–1282
371. Gray KE, Hoerster KD, Taylor L, Krieger J,
Nelson KM. Improvements in physical activity
and some dietary behaviors in a community
health worker-led diabetes self-management
intervention for adults with low incomes: results
from a randomized controlled trial. Transl Behav
Med 2021;11:2144–2154
372. Van Rhoon L, Byrne M, Morrissey E,
Murphy J, McSharry J. A systematic review of the
behaviour change techniques and digital features
in technology-driven type 2 diabetes prevention
interventions.Digit Health 2020;6:2055207620914427
373. Fitzpatrick SL, Schumann KP, Hill-Briggs F.
Problem solving interventions for diabetes self-
management and control: a systematic review of
the literature. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2013;
100:145–161
374. Patton
SR,
Cushing
CC,
Lansing
AH.
Applying
behavioral
economics
theories
to
interventions for persons with diabetes. Curr
Diab Rep 2022;22:219–226
375. Avery L, Flynn D, van Wersch A, Sniehotta
FF,Trenell MI. Changing physical activity behavior
in type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of behavioral interventions. Diabetes
Care 2012;35:2681–2689
376. Lake AJ, Bo A, Hadjiconstantinou M.
Developing and evaluating behaviour change
interventions for people with younger-onset type 2
diabetes: lessons and recommendations from
existing programmes. Curr Diab Rep 2021;21:59
377. Xie LF, Housni
A, Nakhla M, et al.
Adaptation of an adult web application for type 1
diabetes self-management to youth using the
behavior change wheel to tailor the needs of
health
care
transition:
qualitative
interview
study. JMIR Diabetes 2023;8:e42564
378. Berlin KS, Klages KL, Banks GG, et al.
Toward the development of a culturally humble
intervention to improve glycemic control and
quality of life among adolescents with type-1
diabetes and their families. Behav Med 2021;
47:99–110
379. Nicolucci A, Haxhi J, D’Errico V, et al. Effect
of a behavioural intervention for adoption and
maintenance of a physically active lifestyle on
psychological well-being and quality of life in
patients with type 2 diabetes: the IDES_2
randomized clinical trial. Sports Med 2022;
52:643–654
380. Crowley MJ, Tarkington PE, Bosworth HB,
et al. Effect of a comprehensive telehealth
intervention
vs
telemonitoring
and
care
coordination in patients with persistently poor
type 2 diabetes control: a randomized clinical
trial. JAMA Intern Med 2022;182:943–952
381. Kichler JC, Harris MA,Weissberg-Benchell J.
Contemporary roles of the pediatric psychologist
in diabetes care. Curr Diabetes Rev 2015;11:
210–221
382. Harris MA, Freeman KA, Duke DC. Seeing is
believing: using skype to improve diabetes
outcomes in youth. Diabetes Care 2015;38:
1427–1434
383. Kaczmarek T, Kavanagh DJ, Lazzarini PA,
Warnock J, Van Netten JJ. Training diabetes
healthcare practitioners in motivational inter-
viewing: a systematic review. Health Psychol Rev
2022;16:430–449
384. Bell KJ, Barclay AW, Petocz P, Colagiuri S,
Brand-Miller
JC.
Efﬁcacy
of
carbohydrate
counting in type 1 diabetes: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
2014;2:133–140
385. McVoy M, Hardin H, Fulchiero E, et al.
Mental health comorbidity and youth onset type 2
diabetes: A systematic review of the literature. Int
J Psychiatry Med 2023;58:37–55
386. Naicker K, Johnson JA, Skogen JC, et al.
Type 2 diabetes and comorbid symptoms of
depression and anxiety: longitudinal associations
with mortality risk. Diabetes Care 2017;40:
352–358
387. de Groot
M,
Golden SH, Wagner
J.
Psychological conditions in adults with diabetes.
Am Psychol 2016;71:552–562
388. Anderson RJ, Grigsby AB, Freedland KE,
et al. Anxiety and poor glycemic control: a meta-
analytic review of the literature. Int J Psychiatry
Med 2002;32:235–247
389. Delahanty LM, Grant RW, Wittenberg E,
et al. Association of diabetes-related emotional
distress with diabetes treatment in primary care
patients with Type 2 diabetes. Diabet Med
2007;24:48–54
390. Anderson RJ, Freedland KE, Clouse RE,
Lustman
PJ.
The
prevalence
of
comorbid
depression in adults with diabetes: a meta-
analysis. Diabetes Care 2001;24:1069–1078
391. Nicolucci A, Kovacs Burns K, Holt RI, et al.
Diabetes Attitudes, Wishes and Needs second
study (DAWN2): cross-national benchmarking of
diabetes-related
psychosocial
outcomes
for
people with diabetes. Diabet Med 2013;30:
767–777
392. Ducat L, Philipson LH, Anderson BJ. The
mental health comorbidities of diabetes. JAMA
2014;312:691–692
393. Guerrero Fernandez de Alba I, Gimeno-
Miguel A, Poblador-Plou B, et al. Association
between mental health comorbidity and health
outcomes in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients. Sci
Rep 2020;10:19583
394. Gonzalvo JD, Hamm J, Eaves S, et al. A
practical approach to mental health for the
diabetes educator. AADE Pract 2019;7:29–44
395. Robinson DJ, Coons M, Haensel H, Vallis M;
Diabetes Canada Clinical Practice Guidelines
Expert Committee. Diabetes and mental health.
Can J Diabetes 2018;42(Suppl. 1):S130–S141
396. Cho MK, Kim MY. Self-management nursing
intervention
for
controlling
glucose
among
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Int J Environ Res Public Health 2021;18:12750
397. Majidi
S,
Reid
MW,
Fogel
J,
et
al.
Psychosocial outcomes in young adolescents
with type 1 diabetes participating in shared
medical appointments. Pediatr Diabetes 2021;
22:787–795
398. Diaz Bustamante L, Ghattas KN, Ilyas S, Al-
Refai R, Maharjan R, Khan S. Does treatment for
depression with collaborative care improve the
glycemic
levels
in
diabetic
patients
with
depression? A systematic review. Cureus 2020;
12:e10551
399. Phillips S, Culpepper J, Welch M, et al. A
multidisciplinary diabetes clinic improves clinical
and behavioral outcomes in a primary care
setting. J Am Board Fam Med 2021;34:579–589
S106
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

400. Xu C, Dong Z, Zhang P, et al. Effect of group
cognitive behavioural therapy on psychological
stress and blood glucose in people with type 2
diabetes mellitus: A community-based cluster
randomized controlled trial in China. Diabet Med
2021;38:e14491
401. Ali MK, Chwastiak L, Poongothai S, et al.
Effect
of
a
collaborative
care
model
on
depressive symptoms and glycated hemoglobin,
blood pressure, and serum cholesterol among
patients with depression and diabetes in India:
the INDEPENDENT randomized clinical
trial.
JAMA 2020;324:651–662
402. Rechenberg
K,
Koerner
R.
Cognitive
behavioral therapy in adolescents with type 1
diabetes: an integrative review. J Pediatr Nurs
2021;60:190–197
403. McMorrow R, Hunter B, Hendrieckx C,
et al. Effect of routinely assessing and addressing
depression and diabetes distress on clinical
outcomes among adults with type 2 diabetes: a
systematic review. BMJ Open 2022;12:e054650
404. Harkness E, Macdonald W, Valderas J,
Coventry
P,
Gask
L,
Bower
P.
Identifying
psychosocial interventions that improve both
physical and mental health in patients with
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Diabetes Care 2010;33:926–930
405. Radcliff TA, C^ote MJ,Whittington MD, et al.
Cost-effectiveness of three doses of a behavioral
intervention to prevent or delay type 2 diabetes
in rural areas. J Acad Nutr Diet 2020;120:
1163–1171
406. Corathers S, Williford DN, Kichler J, et al.
Implementation of psychosocial screening into
diabetes clinics: experience from the type 1
diabetes exchange quality improvement network.
Curr Diab Rep 2023;23:19–28
407. T1D
Exchange.
Depression
screening
change package. Accessed 14 October 2023.
Available from https://t1dexchange.org/depression
-screening-change-package/
408. Mulvaney SA, Mara CA, Kichler JC, et al. A
retrospective multisite examination of depression
screening practices, scores, and correlates in
pediatric diabetes care. Transl Behav Med 2021;
11:122–131
409. Monaghan M, Mara CA, Kichler JC, et al.
Multisite examination of depression screening
scores and correlates among adolescents and
young adults with type 2 diabetes. Can J Diabetes
2021;45:411–416
410. Watson SE, Spurling SE, Fieldhouse AM,
Montgomery VL,Wintergerst KA. Depression and
anxiety screening in adolescents with diabetes.
Clin Pediatr (Phila) 2020;59:445–449
411. Brodar KE, Davis EM, Lynn C, et al.
Comprehensive
psychosocial
screening
in
a
pediatric diabetes clinic. Pediatr Diabetes 2021;
22:656–666
412. Barnard-Kelly KD, Naranjo D, Majidi S, et al.
Suicide and self-inﬂicted injury in diabetes: a
balancing act. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2020;14:
1010–1016
413. Myers AK, Grannemann BD, Lingvay I,
Trivedi MH. Brief report: depression and history
of suicide attempts in adults with new-onset type 2
diabetes. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2013;38:
2810–2814
414. Sullivant SA, Bradley-Ewing A, Williams DD,
et al. Prevalence of positive suicide risk screens
among adolescents with type 1 diabetes (T1D). J
Psychosom Res 2020;138:110247
415. Majidi S, O’Donnell HK, Stanek K, Youngkin
E, Gomer T, Driscoll KA. Suicide risk assessment in
youth and young adults with type 1 diabetes.
Diabetes Care 2020;43:343–348
416. Barnard-Kelly K, Holt R, O’Neill S. Suicide
and type 1 diabetes: a complex issue. Pract
Diabetes 2022;5:10
417. Moss AC, Roberts AJ, Yi-Frazier JP, et al.
Identifying suicide risk in adolescents and young
adults with type 1 diabetes: are depression
screeners sufﬁcient? Diabetes Care 2022;45:
1288–1291
418. Hill RM, Gallagher KAS, Eshtehardi SS,
Uysal S, Hilliard ME. Suicide risk in youth and
young adults with type 1 diabetes: a review of
the literature and clinical recommendations for
prevention. Curr Diab Rep 2021;21:51
419. Barry MJ, Nicholson WK, Silverstein M,
et al. Screening for depression and suicide risk in
adults:
US
Preventive
Services
Task
Force
recommendation statement. JAMA 2023;329:
2057–2067
420. Mangione CM, Barry MJ, et al. Screening
for depression and suicide risk in children and
adolescents: US Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. JAMA 2022;328:
1534–1542
421. Marker AM, Patton SR, Clements MA, Egan
AE, McDonough RJ. Adjusted cutoff scores
increase
sensitivity
of
depression
screening
measures in adolescents with type 1 diabetes.
Diabetes Care 2022;45:2501–2508
422. Weissberg-Benchell J, Shapiro JB. A review
of interventions aimed at facilitating successful
transition planning and transfer to adult care
among youth with chronic illness. Pediatr Ann
2017;46:e182–e187
423. O’Gurek DT, Henke C. A practical approach
to screening for social determinants of health.
Fam Pract Manag 2018;25:7–12
424. Zhang H, Zhang Q, Luo D, et al. The effect
of family-based intervention for adults with
diabetes on HbA1c and other health-related
outcomes: systematic review and meta-analysis.
J Clin Nurs 2022;31:1488–1501
425. McBroom LA, Enriquez M. Review of
family-centered interventions to enhance the
health
outcomes
of children
with
type
1
diabetes. Diabetes Educ 2009;35:428–438
426. Oyedeji AD, Ullah I, Weich S, Bentall R,
Booth A. Effectiveness of non-specialist delivered
psychological interventions on glycemic control
and mental health problems in individuals with
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Int J Ment Health Syst 2022;16:9
427. Chen SM, Lin HS, Atherton JJ, MacIsaac RJ,
Wu CJ. Effect of a mindfulness programme for
long-term care residents with type 2 diabetes: a
cluster randomised controlled trial measuring
outcomes of glycaemic control, relocation stress
and depression. Int J Older People Nurs 2020;
15:e12312
428. Beverly EA, Hultgren BA, Brooks KM, Ritholz
MD, Abrahamson MJ, Weinger K. Understanding
physicians’ challenges when treating type 2
diabetic patients’ social and emotional difﬁculties:
a qualitative study. Diabetes Care 2011;34:
1086–1088
429. Li Y, Storch EA, Ferguson S, Li L, Buys N, Sun
J. The efﬁcacy of cognitive behavioral therapy-
based intervention on patients with diabetes: a
meta-analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2022;
189:109965
430. Vlachou
E,
Ntikoudi
A,
Owens
DA,
Nikolakopoulou M, Chalimourdas T, Cauli O.
Effectiveness of cognitive behavioral therapy-
based interventions on psychological symptoms
in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus: an update
review of randomized controlled trials. J Diabetes
Complications 2022;36:108185
431. Nikkhah Ravari O, Mousavi SZ, Babak A.
Evaluation
of
the
effects
of
12
weeks
mindfulness-based stress reduction on glycemic
control and mental health indices in women with
diabetes mellitus type 2. Adv Biomed Res 2020;
9:61
432. Ni YX, Ma L, Li JP. Effects of mindfulness-
based intervention on glycemic control and
psychological outcomes in people with diabetes:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Diabetes
Investig 2021;12:1092–1103
433. Hood KK, Iturralde E, Rausch J, Weissberg-
Benchell
J.
Preventing
diabetes
distress
in
adolescents with type 1 diabetes: results 1 year
after
participation
in
the
STePS
program.
Diabetes Care 2018;41:1623–1630
434. Weissberg-Benchell J, Shapiro JB, Bryant
FB, Hood KK. Supporting Teen Problem-Solving
(STEPS) 3 year outcomes: preventing diabetes-
speciﬁc
emotional
distress
and
depressive
symptoms in adolescents with type 1 diabetes. J
Consult Clin Psychol 2020;88:1019–1031
435. Laffel LM, Vangsness L, Connell A, Goebel-
Fabbri A, Butler D, Anderson BJ. Impact of
ambulatory, family-focused teamwork intervention
on glycemic control in youth with type 1 diabetes.
J Pediatr 2003;142:409–416
436. Wysocki T, Harris MA, Buckloh LM, et al.
Effects of behavioral family systems therapy for
diabetes on adolescents’ family relationships,
treatment adherence, and metabolic control. J
Pediatr Psychol 2006;31:928–938
437. Yap JM, Tantono N, Wu VX, Klainin-Yobas P.
Effectiveness of technology-based psychosocial
interventions on diabetes distress and health-
relevant outcomes among type 2 diabetes
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J
Telemed Telecare. 26 November 2021 (Epub
ahead of print). DOI: 10.1177/1357633x211058329
438. Bisno DI, Reid MW, Fogel JL, Pyatak EA,
Majidi S, Raymond JK. Virtual group appointments
reduce distress and improve care management in
young adults with type 1 diabetes. J Diabetes Sci
Technol 2022;16:1419–1427
439. Fisher L, Hessler DM, Polonsky WH, Mullan
J.When is diabetes distress clinically meaningful?
Establishing cut points for the Diabetes Distress
Scale. Diabetes Care 2012;35:259–264
440. Fisher L, Glasgow RE, Strycker LA. The
relationship
between
diabetes
distress
and
clinical depression with glycemic control among
patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care
2010;33:1034–1036
441. Hagger V, Hendrieckx C, Sturt J, Skinner TC,
Speight J. Diabetes distress among adolescents
with type 1 diabetes: a systematic review. Curr
Diab Rep 2016;16:9
442. Wasserman RM, Eshtehardi SS, Anderson
BJ,Weissberg-Benchell JA, Hilliard ME. Proﬁles of
depressive symptoms and diabetes distress in
preadolescents with type 1 diabetes. Can J Diabetes
2021;45:436–443
diabetesjournals.org/care
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
S107
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

443. Aikens JE. Prospective associations between
emotional distress and poor outcomes in
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2012;35:2472–
2478
444. Liu X, Haagsma J, Sijbrands E, et al. Anxiety
and depression in diabetes care: longitudinal
associations with health-related quality of life. Sci
Rep 2020;10:8307
445. Snoek FJ, Bremmer MA, Hermanns N.
Constructs of depression and distress in diabetes:
time for an appraisal. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
2015;3:450–460
446. Sturt J, Dennick K, Hessler D, Hunter BM,
Oliver J, Fisher L. Effective interventions for
reducing diabetes distress: systematic review and
meta-analysis. International Diabetes Nursing
2015;12:40–55
447. Ngan HY, Chong YY, Chien WT. Effects of
mindfulness- and acceptance-based interventions
on diabetes distress and glycaemic level in people
with type 2 diabetes: systematic review and
meta-analysis. Diabet Med 2021;38:e14525
448. Callan JA, Sereika SM, Cui R, et al. Cognitive
behavioral therapy (CBT) telehealth augmented
with a CBT smartphone application to address
type 2 diabetes self-management: a randomized
pilot trial. Sci Diabetes Self Manag Care 2022;
48:492–504
449. Presley C, Agne A, Shelton T, Oster R,
Cherrington A. Mobile-enhanced peer support
for African Americans with type 2 diabetes: a
randomized controlled trial. J Gen Intern Med
2020;35:2889–2896
450. Fisher L, Skaff MM, Mullan JT, et al. Clinical
depression versus distress among patients with
type 2 diabetes: not just a question of semantics.
Diabetes Care 2007;30:542–548
451. Fisher L, Hessler D, Polonsky WH, et al. T1-
REDEEM: a randomized controlled trial to reduce
diabetes distress among adults with type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2018;41:1862–1869
452. DiNardo MM, Greco C, Phares AD, et al.
Effects of an integrated mindfulness intervention
for veterans with diabetes distress: a randomized
controlled trial. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care
2022;10:e002631
453. Lutes LD, Cummings DM, Littlewood K,
et al. A tailored cognitive-behavioural intervention
produces comparable reductions in regimen-
related distress in adults with type 2 diabetes
regardless of insulin use: 12-month outcomes
from the COMRADE trial. Can J Diabetes 2020;
44:530–536
454. Friis
AM,
Johnson
MH,
Cutﬁeld
RG,
Consedine NS. Kindness matters: a randomized
controlled trial of a mindful self-compassion
intervention improves depression, distress, and
HbA1c among patients with diabetes. Diabetes
Care 2016;39:1963–1971
455. Smith KJ, Beland M, Clyde M, et al.
Association of diabetes with anxiety: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Psychosom Res
2013;74:89–99
456. Li C, Barker L, Ford ES, Zhang X, Strine TW,
Mokdad AH. Diabetes and anxiety in US adults:
ﬁndings from the 2006 Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System. Diabet Med 2008;25:878–
881
457. Gonder-Frederick LA, Schmidt KM, Vajda
KA,
et al.
Psychometric
properties of
the
hypoglycemia fear survey-ii for adults with type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2011;34:801–806
458. Wild
D,
von
Maltzahn
R,
Brohan
E,
Christensen T, Clauson P, Gonder-Frederick L. A
critical review of the literature on fear of
hypoglycemia
in
diabetes:
implications
for
diabetes management and patient education.
Patient Educ Couns 2007;68:10–15
459. Alazmi A, Bashiru MB, Viktor S, Erjavec M.
Psychological variables and lifestyle in children
with
type1
diabetes and their
parents: a
systematic review. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry.
30 May 2023 (Epub ahead of print). DOI: 10
.1177/13591045231177115
460. Zhang L, Xu H, Liu L, et al. Related factors
associated with fear of hypoglycemia in parents
of
children
and
adolescents
with
type
1
diabetes—a systematic review. J Pediatr Nurs
2022;66:125–135
461. Zambanini A, Newson RB, Maisey M, Feher
MD. Injection related anxiety in insulin-treated
diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 1999;46:
239–246
462. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-5.
Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Association,
2013
463. Mitsonis C, Dimopoulos N, Psarra V. P01-
138 Clinical implications of anxiety in diabetes: a
critical
review
of
the
evidence
base.
Eur
Psychiatry 2009;24:S526
464. Kemp CG, Johnson LCM, Sagar R, et al.
Effect of a collaborative care model on anxiety
symptoms among patients with depression and
diabetes in India: the INDEPENDENT randomized
clinical trial. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2022;74:39–45
465. Abbas Q, Latif S, Ayaz Habib H, et al.
Cognitive behavior therapy for diabetes distress,
depression, health anxiety, quality of life and
treatment adherence among patients with type-II
diabetes mellitus: a randomized control trial. BMC
Psychiatry 2023;23:86
466. Visser MM, Charleer S, Fieuws S, et al.
Effect of switching from intermittently scanned
to real-time continuous glucose monitoring in
adults with type 1 diabetes: 24-month results
from the randomised ALERTT1 trial. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol 2023;11:96–108
467. Lustman
PJ,
Grifﬁth
LS,
Clouse
RE.
Depression in adults with diabetes. Results of 5-
yr follow-up study. Diabetes Care 1988;11:
605–612
468. de Groot M, Crick KA, Long M, Saha C,
Shubrook JH. Lifetime duration of depressive
disorders in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes Care 2016;39:2174–2181
469. Rubin RR, Ma Y, Marrero DG, et al. Elevated
depression symptoms, antidepressant medicine
use, and risk of developing diabetes during the
diabetes prevention program. Diabetes Care
2008;31:420–426
470. Chen Z,Wang J, Carru C, Coradduzza D, Li Z.
The prevalence of depression among parents of
children/adolescents with type 1 diabetes: a
systematic
review
and
meta-analysis.
Front
Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2023;14:1095729
471. Clouse RE, Lustman PJ, Freedland KE,
Grifﬁth LS, McGill JB, Carney RM. Depression and
coronary heart disease in women with diabetes.
Psychosom Med 2003;65:376–383
472. Vassilopoulos A, Nicholl M, Wolf RM, Slifer
KJ, Cirincione L. Discrepancies in assessing
symptoms of depression in adolescents with
diabetes using the patient health questionnaire
and semi-structured interviews. Diabetes Spectr
2020;33:339–346
473. Katon WJ, Von Korff M, Lin EH, et al. The
Pathways Study: a randomized trial of collaborative
care in patients with diabetes and depression. Arch
Gen Psychiatry 2004;61:1042–1049
474. Cannon
A,
Handelsman
Y,
Heile
M,
Shannon M. Burden of illness in type 2 diabetes
mellitus. J Manag Care Spec Pharm 2018;24:
S5–S13
475. Atlantis E, Fahey P, Foster J. Collaborative
care for comorbid depression and diabetes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Open
2014;4:e004706
476. van der Feltz-Cornelis C, Allen SF, Holt RIG,
Roberts R, Nouwen A, Sartorius N. Treatment for
comorbid depressive disorder or subthreshold
depression
in
diabetes
mellitus:
Systematic
review and meta-analysis. Brain Behav 2021;
11:e01981
477. Lu X, Yang D, Liang J, et al. Effectiveness of
intervention program on the change of glycaemic
control in diabetes with depression patients: a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled studies.
Prim Care Diabetes 2021;15:428–434
478. Varela-Moreno
E,
Carreira
Soler
M,
Guzman-Parra
J,
Jodar-Sanchez
F,
Mayoral-
Cleries F, Anarte-Ortız MT. Effectiveness of
eHealth-based psychological interventions for
depression treatment in patients with type 1 or
type 2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic review.
Front Psychol 2021;12:746217
479. Adhikary D, Barman S, Ranjan R. Internet-
based cognitive behavioural therapy for indi-
viduals with depression and chronic health
conditions: a systematic review. Cureus 2023;
15:e37822
480. Stewart JC, Patel JS, Polanka BM, et al.
Effect of modernized collaborative care for
depression on depressive symptoms and cardio-
vascular
disease
risk
biomarkers:
eIMPACT
randomized controlled trial. Brain Behav Immun
2023;112:18–28
481. Pinhas-Hamiel O, Hamiel U, Levy-Shraga Y.
Eating disorders in adolescents with type 1
diabetes: challenges in diagnosis and treatment.
World J Diabetes 2015;6:517–526
482. Papelbaum M, Appolinario JC, Moreira Rde
O, Ellinger VC, Kupfer R, Coutinho WF. Prevalence
of eating disorders and psychiatric comorbidity in
a clinical sample of type 2 diabetes mellitus
patients. Br J Psychiatry 2005;27:135–138
483. Young-Hyman DL, Davis CL. Disordered
eating behavior in individuals with diabetes:
importance of context, evaluation, and classi-
ﬁcation. Diabetes Care 2010;33:683–689
484. Pinhas-Hamiel O, Hamiel U, Greenﬁeld Y,
et al. Detecting intentional insulin omission for
weight loss in girls with type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Int J Eat Disord 2013;46:819–825
485. Goebel-Fabbri AE, Fikkan J, Franko DL,
Pearson K, Anderson BJ, Weinger K. Insulin
restriction and associated morbidity and mortality
in women with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care
2008;31:415–419
486. Weinger
K,
Beverly
EA.
Barriers
to
achieving glycemic targets: who omits insulin and
why? Diabetes Care 2010;33:450–452
487. Hudson JI, Hiripi E, Pope HG Jr, Kessler RC.
The prevalence and correlates of eating disorders
in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.
Biol Psychiatry 2007;61:348–358
S108
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

488. Martyn-Nemeth P, Quinn L, Hacker E, Park
H, Kujath AS. Diabetes distress may adversely
affect the eating styles of women with type 1
diabetes. Acta Diabetol 2014;51:683–686
489. Pursey KM, Hart M, Jenkins L, McEvoy M,
Smart
CE.
Screening
and
identiﬁcation
of
disordered eating in people with type 1 diabetes:
a systematic review. J Diabetes Complications
2020;34:107522
490. Peterson CM, Fischer S, Young-Hyman D.
Topical review: a comprehensive risk model for
disordered eating in youth with type 1 diabetes. J
Pediatr Psychol 2015;40:385–390
491. Zaremba N, Watson A, Kan C, et al.
Multidisciplinary healthcare teams’ challenges
and strategies in supporting people with type 1
diabetes to recover from disordered eating.
Diabet Med 2020;37:1992–2000
492. Banting R, Randle-Phillips C. A systematic
review
of
psychological
interventions
for
comorbid type 1 diabetes mellitus and eating
disorders. Diabetes Management 2018;8:1–18
493. Priesterroth L, Grammes J, Clauter M,
Kubiak T. Diabetes technologies in people with
type 1 diabetes mellitus and disordered eating: a
systematic review on continuous subcutaneous
insulin infusion, continuous glucose monitoring
and automated insulin delivery. Diabet Med
2021;38:e14581
494. van Bloemendaal L, IJzerman RG, Ten Kulve
JS, et al. GLP-1 receptor activation modulates
appetite- and reward-related brain areas in
humans. Diabetes 2014;63:4186–4196
495. Nicolau J, Pujol A, Tofe S, Bonet A, Gil A.
Short term effects of semaglutide on emotional
eating and other abnormal eating patterns
among subjects living with obesity. Physiol Behav
2022;257:113967
496. Hansson L, Zanchetti A, Carruthers SG,
et al. Effects of intensive blood-pressure lowering
and low-dose aspirin in patients with hypertension:
principal results of the Hypertension Optimal
Treatment (HOT) randomised trial. HOT Study
Group. Lancet 1998;351:1755–1762
497. Suvisaari J, Per€al€a J, Saarni SI, et al. Type 2
diabetes among persons with schizophrenia and
other psychotic disorders in a general population
survey. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2008;
258:129–136
498. Consensus development conference on
antipsychotic drugs and obesity and diabetes.
Diabetes Care 2004;27:596–601
499. Mulligan
K,
McBain
H,
Lamontagne-
Godwin F, et al. Barriers to effective diabetes
management—a survey of people with severe
mental illness. BMC Psychiatry 2018;18:165
500. Kruse J, Schmitz N, Thefeld W. On the
association
between
diabetes
and
mental
disorders in a community sample: results from
the German National Health Interview and
Examination Survey. Diabetes Care 2003;26:
1841–1846
501. Schnitzer K, Cather C, Zvonar V, et al.
Patient experience and predictors of improvement
in a group behavioral and educational intervention
for individuals with diabetes and serious mental
illness: mixed methods case study. J Particip Med
2021;13:e21934
502. Biessels
GJ,
Whitmer
RA.
Cognitive
dysfunction in diabetes: how to implement
emerging guidelines. Diabetologia 2020;63:3–9
503. Brands AM, Biessels GJ, de Haan EH,
Kappelle LJ, Kessels RP. The effects of type 1
diabetes on cognitive performance: a meta-
analysis. Diabetes Care 2005;28:726–735
504. Carmichael OT, Neiberg RH, Dutton GR,
et al. Long-term change in physiological markers
and cognitive performance in type 2 diabetes:
the Look AHEAD study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2020;105:e4778–e4791
505. Avila JC, Mejia-Arangom S, Jupiter D,
Downer B, Wong R. The effect of diabetes on the
cognitive trajectory of older adults in Mexico and
the United States. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci
2021;76:e153–e164
506. Jin CY, Yu SW, Yin JT, Yuan XY, Wang XG.
Corresponding risk factors between cognitive
impairment and type 1 diabetes mellitus: a
narrative review. Heliyon 2022;8:e10073
507. Munshi MN. Cognitive dysfunction in older
adults with diabetes: what a clinician needs to
know. Diabetes Care 2017;40:461–467
508. Biessels GJ, Despa F. Cognitive decline and
dementia in diabetes mellitus: mechanisms and
clinical implications. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2018;
14:591–604
509. Garcia-Argibay M, Li L, Du Rietz E, et al.The
association between type 2 diabetes and attention-
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder: a systematic review,
meta-analysis, and population-based sibling study.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2023;147:105076
510. Ding K, Reynolds CM, Driscoll KA, Janicke
DM.The relationship between executive functioning,
type 1 diabetes self-management behaviors, and
glycemic control in adolescents and young adults.
Curr Diab Rep 2021;21:10
511. Miller AL, Albright D, Bauer KW, et al. Self-
regulation as a protective factor for diabetes
distress and adherence in youth with type 1
diabetes during the COVID-19 pandemic. J
Pediatr Psychol 2022;47:873–882
512. Feinkohl I, Aung PP, Keller M, et al. Severe
hypoglycemia and cognitive decline in older
people with type 2 diabetes: the Edinburgh type 2
diabetes study. Diabetes Care 2014;37:507–515
513. Strudwick SK, Carne C, Gardiner J, Foster
JK, Davis EA, Jones TW. Cognitive functioning in
children with early onset type 1 diabetes and
severe hypoglycemia. J Pediatr 2005;147:680–
685
514. Mauras N, Buckingham B, White NH, et al.
Impact of type 1 diabetes in the developing brain
in children: a longitudinal study. Diabetes Care
2021;44:983–992
515. Tilvis RS, K€ah€onen-V€are MH, Jolkkonen J,
Valvanne J, Pitkala KH, Strandberg TE. Predictors
of cognitive decline and mortality of aged people
over a 10-year period. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med
Sci 2004;59:268–274
516. Jacobson AM, Ryan CM, Cleary PA, et al.
Biomedical risk factors for decreased cognitive
functioning in type 1 diabetes: an 18 year follow-
up of the Diabetes Control and Complications
Trial (DCCT) cohort. Diabetologia 2011;54:245–
255
517. West RK, Ravona-Springer R, Schmeidler J,
et al. The association of duration of type 2
diabetes with cognitive performance is modulated
by long-term glycemic control. Am J Geriatr
Psychiatry 2014;22:1055–1059
518. Cai YH, Wang Z, Feng LY, Ni GX. Effect of
exercise on the cognitive function of older
patients
with
type 2
diabetes
mellitus:
a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Front Hum
Neurosci 2022;16:876935
519. Liu T, Canon MD, Shen L, et al. The
inﬂuence of the BDNF Val66Met polymorphism
on the association of regular physical activity
with cognition among individuals with diabetes.
Biol Res Nurs 2021;23:318–330
520. Anothaisintawee T, Reutrakul S, Van Cauter
E,Thakkinstian A. Sleep disturbances compared to
traditional risk factors for diabetes development:
systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep Med
Rev 2016;30:11–24
521. Cappuccio FP, D’Elia L, Strazzullo P, Miller
MA. Quantity and quality of sleep and incidence
of type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Diabetes Care 2010;33:414–420
522. Zhu B, Shi C, Park CG, Reutrakul S. Sleep
quality and gestational diabetes in pregnant
women: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Sleep Med 2020;67:47–55
523. Zhang X, Zhang R, Cheng L, et al. The effect
of sleep impairment on gestational diabetes
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of cohort studies. Sleep Med 2020;74:267–277
524. Monzon AD, Patton SR, Koren D. Childhood
diabetes and sleep. Pediatr Pulmonol 2022;57:
1835–1850
525. Lee SWH, Ng KY, Chin WK. The impact of
sleep amount and sleep quality on glycemic
control in type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Sleep Med Rev 2017;31:91–101
526. Al-Gadi IS, Streisand R, Tully C, et al. Up all
night? Sleep disruption in parents of young
children newly diagnosed with type 1 diabetes.
Pediatr Diabetes 2022;23:815–819
527. Macaulay GC, Boucher SE, Yogarajah A,
Galland BC, Wheeler BJ. Sleep and night-time
caregiving in parents of children and adolescents
with type 1 diabetes mellitus–a qualitative study.
Behav Sleep Med 2020;18:622–636
528. Reutrakul S, Mokhlesi B. Obstructive sleep
apnea and diabetes: a state of the art review.
Chest 2017;152:1070–1086
529. Barone MT, Menna-Barreto L. Diabetes and
sleep: a complex cause-and-effect relationship.
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2011;91:129–137
530. Denic-Roberts H, Costacou T, Orchard TJ.
Subjective
sleep
disturbances
and
glycemic
control in adults with long-standing type 1
diabetes:
the
Pittsburgh’s
Epidemiology
of
Diabetes Complications study. Diabetes Res Clin
Pract 2016;119:1–12
531. Reutrakul S, Thakkinstian A, Anothaisintawee
T, et al. Sleep characteristics in type 1 diabetes and
associations with glycemic control: systematic
review and meta-analysis. Sleep Med 2016;23:
26–45
532. Ogilvie RP, Patel SR. The epidemiology of
sleep and diabetes. Curr Diab Rep 2018;18:82
533. Schipper SBJ, Van Veen MM, Elders PJM,
et al. Sleep disorders in people with type 2
diabetes and associated health outcomes: a
review of the literature. Diabetologia 2021;
64:2367–2377
534. Bener A, Al-Hamaq A, Agan AF, €Ozt€urk M,
€Omer
A.
The
prevalence
of
restless
legs
syndrome
and
comorbid
condition
among
patient with type 2 diabetic mellitus visiting
primary healthcare. J Family Med Prim Care
2019;8:3814–3820
535. Modarresnia L, Golgiri F, Madani NH,
Emami Z, Tanha K. Restless legs syndrome in
diabetesjournals.org/care
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
S109
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Iranian people with type 2 diabetes mellitus: the
role in quality of life and quality of sleep. J Clin
Sleep Med 2018;14:223–228
536. Manodpitipong A, Saetung S, Nimitphong
H, et al. Night-shift work is associated with
poorer glycaemic control in patients with type 2
diabetes. J Sleep Res 2017;26:764–772
537. El Tayeb I, El Saghier E, Ramadan B. Impact
of shift work on glycemic control in insulin
treated diabetics Dar El Chefa Hospital, Egypt
2014. Int J Diabetes Res 2014;3:15–21
538. Itani O, Kaneita Y, Tokiya M, et al. Short
sleep duration, shift work, and actual days taken
off work are predictive life-style risk factors for
new-onset metabolic syndrome: a seven-year
cohort study of 40,000 male workers. Sleep Med
2017;39:87–94
539. Ji X, Wang Y, Saylor J. Sleep and type 1
diabetes mellitus management among children,
adolescents, and emerging young adults: a
systematic review. J Pediatr Nurs 2021;61:
245–253
540. Perez KM, Hamburger ER, Lyttle M, et al.
Sleep in type 1 diabetes: implications for
glycemic control and diabetes management. Curr
Diab Rep 2018;18:5
541. Tan X, van Egmond L, Chapman CD,
Cedernaes J, Benedict C. Aiding sleep in type 2
diabetes:
therapeutic
considerations.
Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol 2018;6:60–68
542. Carreon SA, Cao VT, Anderson BJ,Thompson
DI, Marrero DG, Hilliard ME. “I don’t sleep
through the night”: qualitative study of sleep in
type 1 diabetes. Diabet Med 2022;39:e14763
543. Cobry EC, Karami AJ, Meltzer LJ. Friend or
foe: a narrative review of the impact of diabetes
technology on sleep. Curr Diab Rep 2022;22:
283–290
544. Cobry EC, Hamburger E, Jaser SS. Impact of
the hybrid closed-loop system on sleep and
quality of life in youth with type 1 diabetes and
their parents. Diabetes Technol Ther 2020;22:
794–800
545. Franceschi R, Mozzillo E, Di Candia F, et al.
A
systematic
review
on
the
impact
of
commercially
available
hybrid
closed
loop
systems on psychological outcomes in youths
with type 1 diabetes and their parents. Diabet
Med 2023;40:e15099
546. Kothari V, Cardona Z, Chirakalwasan N,
Anothaisintawee T, Reutrakul S. Sleep interventions
and glucose metabolism: systematic review and
meta-analysis. Sleep Med 2021;78:24–35
547. Li M, Li D, Tang Y, et al. Effect of diabetes
sleep education for T2DM who sleep after
midnight: a pilot study from China. Metab Syndr
Relat Disord 2018;16:13–19
548. Khandelwal D, Dutta D, Chittawar S, Kalra
S. Sleep disorders in type 2 diabetes. Indian J
Endocrinol Metab 2017;21:758–761
S110
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

6. Glycemic Goals and
Hypoglycemia: Standards of Care
in Diabetes—2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S111–S125 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S006
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes”
includes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to
provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guide-
lines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional
Practice Committee, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for
updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a
detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the
evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full
list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction
and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are
invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
ASSESSMENT OF GLYCEMIC STATUS
Glycemic status is assessed by A1C measurement, blood glucose monitoring (BGM)
by capillary (ﬁnger-stick) devices, and continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) using
time in range (TIR) or mean CGM glucose. Clinical trials of interventions that lower
A1C have demonstrated the beneﬁts of improved glycemia. Glucose monitoring via
CGM or BGM (discussed in detail in Section 7, “Diabetes Technology”) is useful for di-
abetes self-management, can provide nuanced information on glucose responses to
meals, physical activity, and medication changes, and may be particularly useful in in-
dividuals taking insulin. CGM serves an increasingly important role in optimizing the
effectiveness and safety of treatment in many people with type 1 diabetes and in se-
lected people with type 2 diabetes or other forms of diabetes (e.g., cystic ﬁbrosis–related
diabetes). Individuals on a variety of insulin treatment plans can beneﬁt from CGM with
improved glucose levels, decreased hypoglycemia, and enhanced self-efﬁcacy (Section 7,
“Diabetes Technology”) (1).
Glycemic Assessment
Recommendations
6.1 Assess glycemic status by A1C and/or appropriate continuous glucose
monitoring (CGM) metrics at least two times a year. Assess more frequently
(e.g., every 3 months) for individuals not meeting treatment goals, with fre-
quent or severe hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia, changing health status, or
growth and development in youth. E
6.2 Assess glycemic status at least quarterly and as needed in individuals
whose therapy has recently changed and/or who are not meeting glycemic
goals. E
*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice
Committee can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/
dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee. 6. Glycemic goals
and hypoglycemia: Standards of Care in Diabetes—
2024. Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S111–S125
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
6. GLYCEMIC GOALS AND HYPOGLYCEMIA
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
S111
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Glycemic Assessment by A1C
The A1C test is the primary tool for assess-
ing glycemic status in both clinical practice
and clinical trials, and it is strongly linked
to diabetes complications (2–4). A1C re-
ﬂects average glycemia over approxi-
mately 2–3 months. The performance of
laboratory tests for A1C is generally
excellent for National Glycohemoglobin
Standardization Program (NGSP)–certiﬁed
assays (ngsp.org).Thus, A1C testing should
be performed routinely in all people with
diabetes at initial assessment and as part
of continuing care. Measurement approxi-
matelyevery3monthsdetermineswhether
glycemic goals have been reached and
maintained. Adults with type 1 diabetes or
type 2 diabetes with stable glycemia within
goal may do well with A1C testing or other
glucose assessment only twice per year. Un-
stable or intensively managed individuals or
people not at goal with treatment adjust-
ments may require testing more frequently
(every 3 months, with interim assessments
as needed) (5).The use of point-of-care A1C
testing may provide an opportunity for
more timely treatment changes during en-
counters between individuals with diabetes
and health care professionals.
The A1C test is an indirect measure of
average glycemia. Factors that affect he-
moglobin or red blood cell characteristics
or turnover may affect A1C. For example,
conditions that affect red blood cell turn-
over (hemolytic anemia and other ane-
mias, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deﬁciency, recent blood transfusion, use of
drugs that stimulate erythropoiesis, end-
stage kidney disease, and pregnancy) can
interfere with the accuracy of A1C (6).
Some hemoglobin variants can interfere
with some A1C assays; however, most as-
says in use in the U.S. are accurate in indi-
viduals who are heterozygous for the most
common variants (7). A1C cannot be mea-
sured in individuals with sickle cell disease
(HbSS) or other homozygous hemoglobin
variants (e.g., HbEE), since these individu-
als lack HbA (8). In individuals with condi-
tions that interfere with the interpretation
of A1C, alternative approaches to monitor-
ing glycemic status should be used, includ-
ing self-monitoring of blood glucose, CGM,
and/or the use of glycated serum protein
assays (discussed below). A1C does not
provide a measure of glycemic variability
or hypoglycemia. For individuals prone to
glycemic variability, especially people with
type 1 diabetes or type 2 diabetes with se-
vere insulin deﬁciency, glycemic status is
best evaluated by the combination of re-
sults from BGM or CGM and A1C. Discor-
dant results between BGM/CGM and A1C
can be the result of the conditions outlined
above or glycemic variability, with BGM/
CGM missing the extremes.
As discussed in Section 2, “Diagnosis
and Classiﬁcation of Diabetes,” there is
controversy regarding the clinical signiﬁ-
cance of racial differences in A1C (9–12).
There is an emerging understanding of
genetic determinants that may modify
the association between A1C and glu-
cose levels (13). However, race is not a
good proxy for these genetic differences
that are likely present in a small minority
of individuals of all racial groups. There-
fore, race should not be a consideration
for how A1C is used clinically for glyce-
mic monitoring. Limitations of laboratory
tests and within-person variability in glu-
cose and A1C underscore the importance
of using multiple approaches to glycemic
monitoring and further evaluation of
discordant results in all racial or ethnic
groups.
Serum Glycated Protein Assays as
Alternatives to A1C
Fructosamine and glycated albumin are
alternative measures of glycemia that are
approved for clinical use for monitoring
glycemic status in people with diabetes.
Fructosamine reﬂects total glycated se-
rum proteins (mostly albumin). Glycated
albumin assays reﬂect the proportion of
total albumin that is glycated. Due to the
turnover rate of serum protein, fructos-
amine and glycated albumin reﬂect glyce-
mia over the past 2–4 weeks, a shorter-
term time frame than that of A1C. Fruc-
tosamine and glycated albumin are highly
correlated in people with diabetes, and
the performance of modern assays is typi-
cally excellent. Fructosamine and glycated
albumin have been linked to long-term
complications in epidemiologic
cohort
studies (14–18). However, there have
been few clinical trials, and the evidence
base supporting the use of these bio-
markers to monitor glycemic status is
much weaker than that for A1C. In peo-
ple with diabetes who have conditions
where the interpretation of A1C may be
problematic or when A1C cannot be mea-
sured (e.g., homozygous hemoglobin var-
iants), fructosamine or glycated albumin
may be useful alternatives to monitor gly-
cemic status (8).
Correlation Between A1C and Blood
Glucose Monitoring and Continuous
Glucose Monitoring
Table 6.1 provides rough equivalents of
A1C and mean glucose levels based on data
from the international A1C-Derived Average
Glucose (ADAG) study. The ADAG study as-
sessed the correlation between A1C and
frequent BGM and CGM in 507 adults
(83% non-Hispanic White) with type 1,
type 2, and no diabetes (19,20). The
American Diabetes Association (ADA)
and the American Association for Clinical
Chemistry have determined that the cor-
relation (r = 0.92) in the ADAG trial is
strong enough to justify reporting both
the A1C result and the estimated aver-
age glucose (eAG) result when a clinician
orders the A1C test. Clinicians should
note that the mean plasma glucose num-
bers in Table 6.1 are based on 2,700
readings per A1C measurement in the
ADAG trial.
Glycemic Assessment by Blood
Glucose Monitoring
For many people with diabetes, glucose
monitoring, either using BGM by capil-
lary (ﬁnger-stick) devices or CGM in addi-
tion to regular A1C testing, is key for
achieving glycemic goals. Major clinical
trials of insulin-treated individuals have
included BGM as part of multifactorial
interventions to demonstrate the beneﬁt
of intensive glycemic control on diabetes
Table 6.1—Equivalent A1C levels and
estimated average glucose (eAG)
A1C (%)
mg/dL*
mmol/L
5
97 (76–120)
5.4 (4.2–6.7)
6
126 (100–152)
7.0 (5.5–8.5)
7
154 (123–185)
8.6 (6.8–10.3)
8
183 (147–217)
10.2 (8.1–12.1)
9
212 (170–249)
11.8 (9.4–13.9)
10
240 (193–282)
13.4 (10.7–15.7)
11
269 (217–314)
14.9 (12.0–17.5)
12
298 (240–347)
16.5 (13.3–19.3)
Data in parentheses are 95% CI. A calcula-
tor for converting A1C results into eAG, in
either mg/dL or mmol/L, is available at
professional.diabetes.org/eAG.
*These esti-
mates are based on ADAG data of 2,700
glucose measurements over 3 months per
A1C measurement in 507 adults with type 1,
type 2, or no diabetes. The correlation be-
tween A1C and average glucose was 0.92
(19,20). Adapted from Nathan et al. (19).
S112
Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

complications (21). BGM is thus an integral
component of effective therapy for individ-
uals taking insulin. In recent years, CGM
has become a standard method for glucose
monitoring for most people with type 1
diabetes. Both approaches to glucose mon-
itoring allow people with diabetes to evalu-
ate individual responses to therapy and
assess whether glycemic goals are being
safely achieved. The speciﬁc needs and
goals of individuals with diabetes should
dictate BGM frequency and timing. Please
refer to Section 7, “Diabetes Technology,”
for a more complete discussion of the use
of BGM and CGM.
Glycemic Assessment by Continuous
Glucose Monitoring
Recommendations
6.3 Standardized, single-page glucose
reports from CGM devices with visual
cues, such as the ambulatory glucose
proﬁle, should be considered as a stan-
dard summary for all CGM devices. E
6.4 Time in range (TIR) is associated
with the risk of microvascular compli-
cations and can be used for assess-
ment of glycemic status. Additionally,
time below range and time above
range are useful parameters for the
evaluation of the treatment plan
(Table 6.2). C
CGM is particularly useful in people with dia-
betes who are at risk for hypoglycemia and is
commonly used in people with type 1 diabe-
tes (21). Use of CGM in type 2 diabetes (as
well as in several other forms of diabetes) is
growing, especially in people who are taking
insulin. TIR is a useful metric of glycemic sta-
tus. A 10- to 14-day CGM assessment of TIR,
with CGM wear of 70% or higher, and other
CGM metrics can be used to assess glycemic
status and are useful in clinical management
(22–26). TIR, especially mean CGM glucose,
correlates with A1C (27–31). Time below
range (<70 and <54 mg/dL [<3.9 and
<3.0 mmol/L]) and time above range
(>180 mg/dL [>10.0 mmol/L]) are useful
parameters for insulin dose adjustments
and reevaluation of the treatment plan.
The international consensus on CGM
provides guidance on standardized CGM
metrics (Table 6.2) and their clinical inter-
pretation (32). To make these metrics ac-
tionable, standardized reports with visual
summaries, such as the ambulatory glucose
proﬁle (Fig. 6.1), are recommended (32)
and can help individuals with diabetes and
health care professionals interpret the data
to guide treatment decisions (27,30). BGM
and CGM can be useful to guide medical
nutrition therapy and physical activity, pre-
vent hypoglycemia, and aid medication
management. CGM metrics, including TIR
(with time below range and time above
range), can provide helpful insights to in-
form a personalized diabetes management
plan. Remote access to glucose data is
growing and may help improve diabetes
management (33–35).
CGM systems have evolved rapidly in
both accuracy and affordability. As such,
many individuals with diabetes have
these data available to assist with self-
management and their health care profes-
sionals’ assessment of glycemic status. Re-
ports can be generated from CGM that
will allow the health care professional and
person with diabetes to view TIR, a calcu-
lated glucose management indicator, and
assess hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, and
glycemic variability. As discussed in a 2019
consensus report, a report formatted as
shown in Fig. 6.1 can be generated (32).
Published data from two retrospective
studies suggest a strong correlation be-
tween TIR and A1C, with a goal of 70% TIR
aligning with an A1C of 7% (25,28). Note
the goals of therapy next to each metric in
Fig. 6.1 (e.g., low, <4%; very low, <1%) as
values to guide changes in therapy.
GLYCEMIC GOALS
Recommendations
6.5a An A1C goal for many nonpreg-
nant adults of <7% (<53 mmol/mol)
Table 6.2—Standardized CGM metrics for clinical care in nonpregnant individuals with type 1 or type 2 diabetes
Metric
Interpretation
Goals
1. Number of days CGM device is worn
14-day wear for pattern
management
2. Percentage of time CGM device is active
70% of data from 14 days
3. Mean glucose
Simple average of glucose values
*
4. Glucose management indicator
Calculated value approximating A1C
(not always equivalent)
*
5. Glycemic variability (%CV) target
Spread of glucose values
#36%†
6. TAR: % of readings and time >250 mg/dL (>13.9 mmol/L)
Level 2 hyperglycemia
<5% (most adults);
<10% (older adults)
7. TAR: % of readings and time 181–250 mg/dL (10.1–13.9 mmol/L)
Level 1 hyperglycemia
<25% (most adults);
<50% (older adults)‡
8. TIR: % of readings and time 70–180 mg/dL (3.9–10.0 mmol/L)
In range
>70% (most adults);
>50% (older adults)
9. TBR: % of readings and time 54–69 mg/dL (3.0–3.8 mmol/L)
Level 1 hypoglycemia
<4% (most adults);
<1% (older adults)§
10. TBR: % of readings and time <54 mg/dL (<3.0 mmol/L)
Level 2 hypoglycemia
<1%
CGM, continuous glucose monitoring; CV, coefﬁcient of variation; TAR, time above range; TBR, time below range; TIR, time in range. *Goals
for these values are not standardized. †Some studies suggest that lower %CV targets (<33%) provide additional protection against hypoglyce-
mia for those receiving insulin or sulfonylureas. ‡Goals are for level 1 and level 2 hyperglycemia combined. §Goals are for level 1 and level 2
hypoglycemia combined. Adapted from Battelino et al. (32).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia
S113
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

AGP Report: Continuous Glucose Monitoring
Test Patient   DOB: Jan 1, 1970
14 Days: August 8–August 21, 2021    
Time CGM Active: 100%
Glucose Metrics  
Average Glucose...........................................175 mg/dL
Goal: <154 mg/dL
Glucose Management Indicator (GMI) ...............7.5%
Goal: <7%
Glucose Variability ............................................ 45.5%
Goal: <36%
AGP is a summary of glucose values from the report period, with median (50%) and other percentiles shown as if they occurred in a single day.
Time in Ranges    Goals for Type 1 and Type 2 Diabetes
Very High
20%
High
24%
Target
Low
5%
Very Low
5%
46%
Goal: >70%
Goal: <5%
Goal: <1%
44%
Goal: <25%
10%
Goal: <4%
Each 1% time in range = ~15 minutes
mg/dL
250
180
70
54
Target
Range
12am
3am
6am
9am
12pm
3pm
6pm
9pm
12am
350
mg/dL
250
   180
     70
54
0
95%
75%
50%
25%
5%
12pm
12pm
12pm
12pm
12pm
12pm
12pm 
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
180
70
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
180
70
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
mg/dL
mg/dL
13
13
Figure 6.1—Key points included in a standard ambulatory glucose proﬁle (AGP) report. Reprinted from Holt et al. (21).
S114
Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

without signiﬁcant hypoglycemia is
appropriate. A
6.5b If using an ambulatory glucose
proﬁle/glucose management indicator
to assess glycemia, a parallel goal for
many nonpregnant adults is TIR >70%
with time below range <4% and time
<54 mg/dL (<3 mmol/L) <1%. For
those with frailty or at high risk of hy-
poglycemia, a goal of >50% TIR with
<1% time below range is recom-
mended (Fig. 6.1 and Table 6.2). B
6.6 On the basis of health care profes-
sional judgment and the preference of
the person with diabetes, achievement
of lower A1C levels than the goal of
7% (53 mmol/mol) may be acceptable
and even beneﬁcial if it can be achieved
safely without signiﬁcant hypoglycemia
or other adverse effects of treatment. B
6.7 Less stringent glycemic goals may
be appropriate for individuals with lim-
ited life expectancy or where the harms
of treatment are greater than the ben-
eﬁts. B
6.8a Deintensify hypoglycemia-causing
medications (insulin, sulfonylureas, or
meglitinides), or switch to a medica-
tion class with lower hypoglycemia
risk, for individuals who are at high
risk for hypoglycemia, within individu-
alized glycemic goals. B
6.8b Deintensify diabetes medications
for individuals for whom the harms
and/or burdens of treatment may be
greater than the beneﬁts, within indi-
vidualized glycemic goals. B
6.9 Reassess glycemic goals based
on the individualized criteria shown
in Fig. 6.2. E
6.10 Setting a glycemic goal during
consultations is likely to improve
patient outcomes. E
For all populations, it is critical that the
glycemic goals be woven into the overall
person-centered strategy (Fig. 6.2) (36).
For example, less stringent A1C goals are
appropriate for individuals with limited
life expectancy and/or signiﬁcant func-
tional and cognitive impairments. In a
very young child, safety and simplicity
may outweigh the need for glycemic
stability in the short run. Recommended
glycemic goals for many nonpregnant
adults are shown in Table 6.3. The
recommendations include blood glu-
cose levels that appear to correlate
with an A1C of <7% (<53 mmol/mol). For
glycemic goals in older adults, please refer
to Section 13, “Older Adults.” For glyce-
mic goals in children, please refer to
Section 14, “Children and Adolescents.”
For glycemic goals during pregnancy,
please refer to Section 15, “Management
of Diabetes in Pregnancy.”
The health care professional needs to
work with the individual (as well as with
family members and caregivers) and should
consider adjusting goals for simplifying the
treatment plan if this change is needed to
improve safety and medication-taking be-
havior. Setting speciﬁc glycemic (and other)
goalsduring consultations is likely to improve
outcomesforindividuals with diabetes(37).
Glucose Lowering and Microvascular
Complications
Hyperglycemia deﬁnes diabetes, and
achieving glycemic goals is fundamental to
diabetes management.The level of chronic
hyperglycemia is the best-established con-
comitant riskfactorassociatedwithmicrovas-
cular complications (i.e., diabetic retinopathy,
nephropathy, and neuropathy). This is best
understood by the fact that nerve, retinal,
and kidney cells do not require insulin for in-
tracellularglucose entry. Consequently,these
cells,whenexposedtoelevatedambient glu-
cose levels even in the presence of insulin
deﬁciency (absolute or relative), will result in
intracellular metabolic dysfunction and in-
creasedriskof microvascularcomplications.
low
Person / Disease Features
Risks potentially associated
with hypoglycemia and
other drug adverse effects
Disease duration
Life expectancy
Important comorbidities
Established vascular
complications
Individual needs and preferences
Resources and support
system
More stringent
Approach to Individualization of Glycemic Targets
Less stringent
A1C 7%
high
long-standing
short
severe
severe
preference for less
burdensome therapy
limited
Potentially modifiable
Usually not modifiable
newly diagnosed
long
absent
absent
highly motivated, excellent
self-care capabilities
readily available
few / mild
few / mild
Figure 6.2—Person and disease factors used to determine optimal glycemic targets. Characteristics and
predicaments toward the left justify more stringent efforts to lower A1C; those toward the right suggest
less stringent efforts. A1C 7% = 53 mmol/mol. Adapted with permission from Inzucchi et al. (36).
Table 6.3—Summary of glycemic recommendations for many nonpregnant
adults with diabetes
A1C
<7.0% (<53 mmol/mol)*†
Preprandial capillary plasma glucose
80–130 mg/dL* (4.4–7.2 mmol/L)
Peak postprandial capillary plasma glucose‡
<180 mg/dL* (<10.0 mmol/L)
*More or less stringent glycemic goals may be appropriate for individuals. †CGM may be
used to assess glycemic status as noted in Recommendation 6.5b and Fig. 6.1. Goals should
be individualized based on duration of diabetes, age/life expectancy, comorbid conditions,
known CVD or advanced microvascular complications, hypoglycemia unawareness, and indi-
vidual patient considerations (per Fig. 6.2). ‡Postprandial glucose may be targeted if A1C goals
are not met despite reaching preprandial glucose goals. Postprandial glucose measurements should
be made 1–2 h after the beginning of the meal, generally peak levels in people with diabetes.
diabetesjournals.org/care
Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia
S115
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

The Diabetes Control and Complications
Trial (DCCT) (38), a prospective randomized
controlled trial of intensive (mean A1C
7% [53 mmol/mol]) versus standard
(mean A1C 9% [75 mmol/mol]) glycemic
control in people with type 1 diabetes,
showed deﬁnitively that better glycemic
status is associated with 50–76% reduc-
tions in rates of development and pro-
gression of microvascular complications
(retinopathy, neuropathy, and diabetic
kidney disease). Follow-up of the DCCT
cohorts in the Epidemiology of Diabetes
Interventions and Complications (EDIC)
study (39,40) demonstrated persistence
of these microvascular beneﬁts over two
decades even though the glycemic sepa-
ration between the treatment groups
diminished and disappeared during
follow-up.
The Kumamoto Study (41) and UK Pro-
spective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) (42,43)
examined the effects of “intensive glyce-
mic control” among people with short-
duration type 2 diabetes, although glyce-
mic lowering in these studies was not
intensive by current standards (mean A1C
was 7.1% vs. 9.4% in the Kumamoto
Study and 7.0% vs. 7.9% in UKPDS). These
trials found lower rates of microvascular
complications in the intervention arms,
with long-term follow-up of the UKPDS
cohorts showing enduring effects on most
microvascular complications (44). These
studies highlight the long-term beneﬁts of
early glycemic lowering in type 2 diabetes.
Therefore, improved glycemia has been
shown to reduce microvascular complica-
tions of type 1 and type 2 diabetes when
instituted early in the course of disease
(2,45). The DCCT (38) and UKPDS (46)
studies demonstrated a curvilinear rela-
tionship between A1C and microvascular
complications. Such results suggest that,
on a population level, the greatest num-
ber of complications will be averted by
taking individuals with diabetes from very
high to moderate glycemic levels. These
analyses also suggest that further lower-
ing of A1C from 7% to 6% (53 mmol/mol
to 42 mmol/mol) is associated with fur-
ther reduction in the risk of microvascular
complications, although the absolute risk
reductions become much smaller. The im-
plication of these ﬁndings is that there is
no need to deintensify therapy for an in-
dividual with an A1C between 6% and 7%
in the setting of low hypoglycemia risk with
a long life expectancy. There are newer
agents that do not cause hypoglycemia,
making it possible to maintain glycemic sta-
tus without the risk of hypoglycemia (see
Section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches to
Glycemic Treatment”). Moreover, CGM use
was not as common when these trials were
conducted and automated insulin delivery
systems were not available, which have
been shown to improve glucose levels with-
out increasing hypoglycemia.
Among individuals with type 2 diabetes,
three landmark trials (Action to Control
Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes [ACCORD],
Action in Diabetes and Vascular Disease:
Preterax and Diamicron MR Controlled
Evaluation [ADVANCE], and Veterans Af-
fairs Diabetes Trial [VADT]) were conducted
to test the effects of near normalization of
blood glucose on cardiovascular outcomes.
The ADVANCE and VADT trials found mod-
est reduction in nephropathy with intensive
glycemic control; ACCORD was stopped af-
ter a median of 3.5 years due to higher
mortality in the intervention arm (47–51).
Importantly, these landmark studies were
conducted prior to the approval ofglucagon-
like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists and
sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2)
inhibitors, and intensive glycemic control
wasachievedpredominantlythroughgreater
use of insulin. Findings from these studies,
including the concerning increase in mor-
tality in the intensive treatment arm of
ACCORD, suggest caution is needed in
treating diabetes to near-normal A1C
goals in people with long-standing type 2
diabetes using medications with a high
risk for hypoglycemia.
Glucose Lowering and
Cardiovascular Disease Outcomes
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a more
common cause of death than microvas-
cular complications in populations with
diabetes. The modern multifaceted man-
agement of diabetes, with a focus on the
treatment of hypertension and the use
of statins, has reduced the prevalence of
atherosclerotic CVD to around double
compared with that of people without di-
abetes (52).
The DCCT in individuals with type 1 dia-
betes and the UKPDS, ACCORD, ADVANCE,
and VADT studies in type 2 diabetes all at-
tempted to address whether intensive gly-
cemic control reduced CVD events (38,47,
48,50). ACCORD, ADVANCE, and VADTwere
conducted in relatively older participants
withalongerdurationofdiabetes(meandu-
ration 8–11 years) and either CVD or multi-
ple cardiovascular risk factors. Details of
these studies are reviewed extensively in
the joint ADA position statement “Intensive
Glycemic Control and the Prevention of
Cardiovascular Events: Implications of the
ACCORD, ADVANCE, and VA Diabetes
Trials” (53).
No signiﬁcant reduction in composite
CVD events was demonstrated at the end
of the intervention in any of these studies,
and ACCORD was stopped prematurely at
3.5 years because of an increase in total
mortality, particularly sudden CVD deaths.
Serious concerns with the intensive glyce-
mic treatment plan used in ACCORD in-
cluded the rapid escalation of therapies,
the early use of large doses of insulin, mas-
sive weight gain, and frequent hypoglyce-
mia. These overall negative results were
not unexpected, as blood glucose has sub-
sequently been shown to be a relatively
weak CVD risk factor in isolation compared
with other CVD risk factors, such as hyper-
tension or hypercholesterolemia. Conse-
quently, even if a wide separation in A1C
could be safely obtained, it would take a
long time for the CVD beneﬁt to accrue.
However, meta-analysis of individual
participant data from UKPDS, ACCORD,
ADVANCE, and VADT demonstrated a
signiﬁcant reduction in myocardial in-
farctions and major CVD events but no
difference in stroke, heart failure, or
mortality between intensive and less in-
tensive glycemic control (54).
Longer-term epidemiological follow-up
has been performed in these studies, and a
clear pattern of CVD beneﬁt has emerged
(55–57). In the post-DCCT follow-up of
the EDIC cohort, participants previ-
ously randomized to the intensive arm
had a signiﬁcant 57% reduction in the
risk of nonfatal myocardial infarction,
stroke, or cardiovascular death com-
pared with those previously random-
ized to the standard arm (55). The
beneﬁt of intensive glycemic control in
this cohort with type 1 diabetes has
been shown to persist for several deca-
des (56) and to be associated with a
modest reduction in all-cause mortal-
ity (58).
UKPDSpost-trialmonitoring,with20years
of total follow-up, has shown reductions
in myocardial infarctions and total mortal-
ity both in the group of overweight indi-
viduals treated with metformin and in the
group previously treated intensively with
sulfonylureas or insulin (44). Shorter over-
all follow-up of the VADT (10 years) has
shown a signiﬁcant reduction in the primary
S116
Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

outcome of major CVD events, with myocar-
dial infarctions and heart failure being the
commonest outcomes (57). In contrast,
shorter follow-up of the ADVANCE study
in the Action in Diabetes and Vascular Dis-
ease Preterax and Diamicron MR Con-
trolled Evaluation Post Trial Observational
Study (ADVANCE-ON) demonstrated no sig-
niﬁcant effect on CVD events (59). Even in
the epidemiological follow-up of ACCORD
in the Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk
in Diabetes Follow-On Study (ACCORDION),
the excess increase in total mortality that
was seen during 3.5 years of intensive
treatment was reduced by returning to
conventional control, so that there was no
difference in total mortality after a total of
9 years of follow-up and the increase in
CVD deaths was obtunded (60). Collec-
tively, the results of these studies conﬁrm
that long-term intensive glycemic control
reduces CVD events, particularly myocar-
dial infarctions.
As discussed above, these landmark
studies in individuals with type 2 diabetes
need to be considered with the important
caveat that GLP-1 receptor agonists
and SGLT2 inhibitors were not yet in
clinical use. These agents with estab-
lished cardiovascular and renal beneﬁts
appear to be safe and beneﬁcial in this
group of individuals at high risk for cardi-
orenal complications. Randomized clinical
trials examining these agents for cardio-
vascular safety were not designed to test
higher versus lower A1C; therefore, be-
yond post hoc analysis of these trials, we
do not have evidence that it is the glucose
lowering per se by these agents that con-
fers the CVD and renal beneﬁt (61). Addi-
tional beneﬁcial pleotropic effects of these
agents may include weight loss, hemody-
namic effects, blood pressure lowering,
and anti-inﬂammatory changes.
As discussed further below, severe hy-
poglycemia is a potent marker of high ab-
solute risk of cardiovascular events and
mortality (62). Therefore, health care pro-
fessionals should be vigilant in preventing
hypoglycemia and should not aggressively
attempt to achieve near-normal A1C levels
in people in whom such targets cannot
be safely and reasonably achieved. As
discussed in Section 9, “Pharmacologic
Approaches to Glycemic Treatment,” addi-
tion of speciﬁc SGLT2 inhibitors or GLP-1
receptor agonists that have demonstrated
CVD beneﬁt is recommended in individu-
als with established CVD, chronic kidney
disease, and heart failure. As outlined in
more detail in Section 9, “Pharmacologic
Approaches to Glycemic Treatment,” and
Section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and
Risk Management,” the cardiovascular ben-
eﬁts of SGLT2 inhibitors or GLP-1 receptor
agonists are not contingent upon A1C low-
ering; therefore, initiation can be consid-
ered in people with type 2 diabetes and
CVD independent of the current A1C or
A1C goal or metformin therapy. Based on
these considerations, the following two
strategies are offered (63):
1. If already on dual therapy or multiple
glucose-lowering therapies and not on
an SGLT2 inhibitor or a GLP-1 receptor
agonist, consider switching to one of
these agents with proven cardiovascular
beneﬁt.
2. Introduce SGLT2 inhibitors or GLP-1
receptor agonists in people with CVD
at A1C goal (independent of metformin)
for cardiovascular beneﬁt, independent
of baseline A1C or individualized A1C
goal.
Setting and Modifying Glycemic
Goals
Glycemic goals and management should
be individualized and not one size ﬁts all.
To prevent both microvascular and mac-
rovascular complications of diabetes,
there is a major call to overcome thera-
peutic inertia and treat to individualized
goals (53,64).
Numerous factors must be consid-
ered when setting a glycemic goal. The
ADA proposes general goals that are ap-
propriate for many people but empha-
sizes the importance of individualization
based on key patient characteristics. Gly-
cemic goals must be individualized in the
context of shared decision-making to ad-
dress individual needs and preferences
and consider characteristics that inﬂu-
ence risks and beneﬁts of therapy; this
approach may optimize engagement and
self-efﬁcacy.
The factors to consider in individualiz-
ing goals are depicted in Fig. 6.2. This
ﬁgure is not designed to be applied rig-
idly in the care of a given individual but
to be used as a broad framework to guide
clinical decision-making (36) and engage
people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes in
shared decision-making. More aggressive
goals may be recommended if they can
be achieved safely and with an acceptable
burden of therapy and if life expectancy is
sufﬁcient to reap the beneﬁts of stringent
goals. Less stringent goals (e.g., A1C up to
8% [64 mmol/mol]) may be recommended
if the individual’s life expectancy is such
that the beneﬁts of an intensive goal may
not be realized or if the risks and burdens
outweigh the potential beneﬁts. Severe or
frequent hypoglycemia is an absolute indi-
cation for the modiﬁcation of treatment
plans, including setting higher glycemic
goals.
Diabetes is a chronic disease that pro-
gresses over decades. Thus, a goal that
might be appropriate for an individual
early in the course of their diabetes may
change over time. Newly diagnosed indi-
vidualsand/or those withoutcomorbidities
that limit life expectancy may beneﬁt from
intensive glycemic goals proven to prevent
microvascular complications. Both DCCT/
EDIC and UKPDS suggested that there is
metabolic memory, or a legacy effect, in
which a ﬁnite period of intensive glucose
lowering yielded beneﬁts that extended
for decades after that period ended. How-
ever, there are few recent data on the ef-
fects of long-term glucose lowering using
modern treatment strategies. Thus, a ﬁ-
nite period of intensive treatment to
near-normal A1C may yield enduring ben-
eﬁts even if treatment is subsequently de-
intensiﬁed as characteristics change. Over
time, comorbidities may emerge, decreas-
ing life expectancy and thereby decreas-
ing the potential to reap beneﬁts from
intensive treatment. Also, with longer dis-
ease duration, diabetes may become
more difﬁcult to control, with increasing
risks and burdens of therapy. Thus, glyce-
mic goals should be reevaluated over
time to balance the risks and beneﬁts.
Accordingly, clinicians should continue
to evaluate the balance of risks and ben-
eﬁts of diabetes medications for individu-
als who have achieved individualized
glycemic goals, and they should deinten-
sify (decrease the dose or stop) diabetes
medications where their risks exceed
their beneﬁts. Hypoglycemia is the major
risk to individuals treated with insulin,
sulfonylureas, or meglitinides, and it is
appropriate to deintensify these medica-
tions where there is a high risk for hypo-
glycemia (see HYPOGLYCEMIA RISK ASSESSMENT,
below). Switching a high-hypoglycemia-risk
medication to lower-hypoglycemia-risk
therapy (see Section 9, “Pharmacologic
Approaches to Glycemic Treatment”)
should be considered if needed to achieve
individualized glycemic goals or where in-
dividuals have evidence-based indications
diabetesjournals.org/care
Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia
S117
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

for alternative medications (e.g., use of
SGLT2 inhibitors in the setting of heart
failure or diabetic kidney disease and use
of GLP-1 receptor agonists in the setting
of CVD or obesity). Clinicians should also
consider medication burdens other than
hypoglycemia, includingtolerability, difﬁcul-
ties of administration, impact on education
or employment, and ﬁnancial cost. These
factors should be balanced against bene-
ﬁts from glycemic lowering and disease-
speciﬁc beneﬁts of newer medications
that may be independent of glycemic
lowering
(Section
9,
“Pharmacologic
Approaches to Glycemic Treatment”).
Multiple trials have shown that deinten-
siﬁcation of diabetes treatment can be
achieved successfully and safely (65–68).
It is important to partner with people
with diabetes during the deintensiﬁcation
processto understand their goals ofdiabe-
tes treatment and agree upon appropri-
ate glycemic monitoring, glucose levels,
and goals of care (69).
HYPOGLYCEMIA ASSESSMENT,
PREVENTION, AND TREATMENT
Recommendations
6.11a History of hypoglycemia should
be reviewed at every clinical encoun-
ter for all individuals at risk for hypo-
glycemia and evaluated as indicated. C
6.11b Clinicians should screen all in-
dividuals at risk for hypoglycemia
for impaired hypoglycemia aware-
ness. E
6.11c Clinicians should consider an
individual’s risk for hypoglycemia
(see Table 6.5) when selecting diabe-
tes medications and glycemic goals. E
6.11d Use of CGM is beneﬁcial and
recommended for individuals at high
risk for hypoglycemia. A
6.12 Glucose is the preferred treat-
ment for the conscious individual with
glucose <70 mg/dL (<3.9 mmol/L),
although any form of carbohydrate
that contains glucose may be used.
Fifteen minutes after initial treat-
ment, repeat the treatment if hy-
poglycemia persists. B
6.13 Glucagon should be prescribed
for all individuals taking insulin or at
high risk for hypoglycemia. Family, care-
givers, school personnel, and others
providing support to these individuals
should know its location and be edu-
cated
on
how
to
administer
it.
Glucagon preparations that do not
have to be reconstituted are pre-
ferred. E
6.14 All individuals taking insulin A
or at risk for hypoglycemia C should
receive structured education for hy-
poglycemia prevention and treat-
ment, with ongoing education for
those who experience hypoglycemic
events.
6.15 One or more episodes of level 2
or 3 hypoglycemia should prompt
reevaluation of the treatment plan, in-
cluding deintensifying or switching dia-
betes medications if appropriate. E
6.16 Refer individuals with impaired
hypoglycemia awareness to a trained
health care professional to receive
evidence-based intervention to help
reestablish awareness of symptoms
of hypoglycemia. A
6.17 Ongoing assessment of cognitive
function is suggested with increased vig-
ilance for hypoglycemia by the clinician,
patient, and caregivers if impaired or
declining cognition is found. B
Hypoglycemia Deﬁnitions and Event
Rates
Hypoglycemia is often the major limiting
factor in the glycemic management of
type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Recommen-
dations regarding the classiﬁcation of
hypoglycemia are outlined in Table 6.4
(70). Level 1 hypoglycemia is deﬁned as
a
measurable
glucose
concentration
<70 mg/dL (<3.9 mmol/L) but $54 mg/dL
($3.0 mmol/L). A blood glucose con-
centration of 70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L)
has been recognized as a threshold for
neuroendocrine responses to falling glu-
cose in people without diabetes. Symp-
toms of hypoglycemia include, but are
not limited to, shakiness, irritability, con-
fusion, tachycardia, sweating, and hunger
(71). Because many people with diabetes
demonstrate impaired counterregulatory
responses to hypoglycemia and/or expe-
rience impaired hypoglycemia awareness,
a measured glucose level <70 mg/dL
(<3.9 mmol/L) is considered clinically im-
portant, regardless of symptoms. Level 2
hypoglycemia (deﬁned as a blood glucose
concentration <54 mg/dL [<3.0 mmol/L])
is the threshold at which neuroglycopenic
symptoms begin to occur and requires im-
mediate action to resolve the hypoglyce-
mic event. If an individual has level 2
hypoglycemia without adrenergic or neu-
roglycopenic symptoms, they likely have
impaired hypoglycemia awareness (dis-
cussed further in HYPOGLYCENMIA RISK ASSESSMENT,
below). This clinical scenario warrants inves-
tigation and review of the treatment plan
(72,73). Lastly, level 3 hypoglycemia is de-
ﬁned as a severe event characterized by al-
tered mental and/or physical functioning
that requires assistance from another per-
son for recovery, irrespective of glucose
level.
Hypoglycemia has a broad range of
negative health consequences (74). Level 3
hypoglycemia may be recognized or un-
recognized and can progress to loss of
consciousness, seizure, coma, or death.
Level 3 hypoglycemia was associated with
mortality in both the standard and the in-
tensive glycemia arms of the ACCORD trial,
but the relationships between hypoglyce-
mia, achieved A1C, and treatment inten-
sity were not straightforward (75). An
association of level 3 hypoglycemia with
mortality was also found in the ADVANCE
trial and in clinical practice (76,77). Hypo-
glycemia can cause acute harm to the per-
son with diabetes or others, especially if it
causes falls, motor vehicle accidents, or
other injury (78). Hypoglycemia may also
cause substantial anxiety that can reduce
the quality of life of individuals with dia-
betes and their caregivers and may con-
tribute to problems with diabetes self-
management and treatment (79–81).
Recurrent level 2 hypoglycemia and/or
level 3 hypoglycemia is an urgent medi-
cal issue and requires intervention with
medical treatment plan adjustment, be-
havioral intervention, delivery of diabetes
Table 6.4—Classiﬁcation of hypoglycemia
Glycemic criteria/description
Level 1
Glucose <70 mg/dL (<3.9 mmol/L) and $54 mg/dL ($3.0 mmol/L)
Level 2
Glucose <54 mg/dL (<3.0 mmol/L)
Level 3
A severe event characterized by altered mental and/or physical status requiring
assistance for treatment of hypoglycemia, irrespective of glucose level
Reprinted from Agiostratidou et al. (70).
S118
Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

self-management education and support,
and use of technology to assist with hypo-
glycemia prevention and identiﬁcation
(73,82–85).
Studies of rates of hypoglycemia pre-
dominantly rely on claims data for hospi-
talizations and emergency department
visits (86–89). These studies do not cap-
ture the level 1 and level 2 hypoglycemia
that represent the vast majority of hypo-
glycemic events, and they also substan-
tially underestimate level 3 hypoglycemia
(86,90). Nevertheless, they reveal a sub-
stantial burden of hypoglycemia-related
hospital utilization in the community (86–89).
Level 1 and level 2 hypoglycemia can be as-
certained from patient self-report (91) and
are strong risk factors for subsequent level 3
hypoglycemia.
Hypoglycemia Risk Assessment
Assessment of an individual’s risk for hypo-
glycemia includes evaluating clinical risk
factors as well as relevant social, cultural,
and economic factors (Table 6.5). Recom-
mendations 6.11–6.17 group individuals
with diabetes into two hypoglycemia risk
categories with clinical signiﬁcance. Indi-
viduals at risk for hypoglycemia are those
treated with insulin, sulfonylureas, or me-
glitinides; clinically signiﬁcant hypoglyce-
mia is rare among individuals taking other
diabetes medication classes (92,93). Indi-
viduals at high risk for hypoglycemia are
the subset of individuals at risk for hypogly-
cemia who either have a major hypoglyce-
mia risk factor or have multiple other risk
factors (determined by the health care pro-
fessional incorporating clinical judgment)
(Table 6.5). This risk stratiﬁcation is based
on epidemiologic studies of hypoglycemia
risk (87,88,92,94–97). Validated tools have
been developed to estimate hypoglyce-
mia risk using predominantly electronic
health record data (98–100). However,
these tools do not include all of the im-
portant hypoglycemia risk factors, and
more research is needed to determine
how they can best be incorporated into
clinical care.
Among individuals at risk for hypoglyce-
mia, prior hypoglycemic events, especially
level 2 or 3 events, are the strongest risk
factors for hypoglycemia recurrence and
severity (96,101–103). Hypoglycemia his-
tory should be assessed at every clinical
encounter and should include hypoglyce-
mic event frequency, severity, precipi-
tants, symptoms (or lack thereof), and
approach to treatment. It is essential to
correlate home glucose readings, both
from glucose meters and CGM systems,
with symptoms and treatment, as individ-
uals may experience and treat hypoglyce-
mic symptoms without checking their
glucose level (104), treat normal glucose
values as hypoglycemic, or tolerate hypo-
glycemia without treatment either be-
cause of lack of symptoms or to avoid
hyperglycemia.
Individuals at risk for hypoglycemia
should also be screened for impaired hy-
poglycemia awareness (also called hypo-
glycemia unawareness or hypoglycemia-
associated autonomic failure) at least
yearly. Impaired hypoglycemia awareness
is deﬁned as not experiencing the typical
counterregulatory hormone release at
low glucose levels or the associated symp-
toms, which often occurs in individuals
with long-standing diabetes or recurrent
hypoglycemia(105).Individualswithimpaired
hypoglycemia awareness may experience
confusion as the ﬁrst sign of hypoglycemia,
which can create fear of hypoglycemia and
severely impact quality of life (106). Impaired
hypoglycemia awareness dramatically in-
creases the risk for level 3 hypoglycemia
(107). The Clark and Gold scores are vali-
dated questionnaires to assess impaired hy-
poglycemia awareness (108,109). However,
these questionnaires may be impractical for
routine clinical use. A recommended strat-
egy is to screen for impaired hypoglycemia
awareness by asking individuals whether
they ever have low blood glucose without
feeling symptoms, or by asking at what
blood glucose levels they typically begin to
feel symptoms (and what those symptoms
Table 6.5—Assessment of hypoglycemia risk among individuals treated with
insulin, sulfonylureas, or meglitinides
Clinical/biological risk factors
Social, cultural, and economic risk factors
Major risk factors
 Recent (within the past 3–6 months) level 2
or 3 hypoglycemia
 Intensive insulin therapy*
 Impaired hypoglycemia awareness
 End-stage kidney disease
 Cognitive impairment or dementia
Major risk factors
 Food insecurity
 Low-income status§
 Homelessness
 Fasting for religious or cultural reasons
Other risk factors
 Multiple recent episodes of level 1
hypoglycemia
 Basal insulin therapy*
 Age $75 years†
 Female sex
 High glycemic variability‡
 Polypharmacy
 Cardiovascular disease
 Chronic kidney disease (eGFR <60 mL/min/
1.73 m2 or albuminuria)
 Neuropathy
 Retinopathy
 Major depressive disorder
Other risk factors
 Low health literacy
 Alcohol or substance use disorder
Major risk factors are those that have a consistent, independent association with a high
risk for level 2 or 3 hypoglycemia. Other risk factors are those with less consistent evidence
or a weaker association. These risk factors are identiﬁed through observational analyses
and are intended to be used for hypoglycemia risk stratiﬁcation. Individuals considered at
high risk for hypoglycemia are those with $1 major risk factor or who have multiple other
risk factors (determined by the health care professional incorporating clinical judgment)
(87,88,92,94–97,113,146). Proximal causes of hypoglycemic events (e.g., exercise and sleep)
are not included. eGFR, estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate. *Rates of hypoglycemia are
highest for individuals treated with intensive insulin therapy (including multiple daily injections
of insulin, continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion, or automated insulin delivery systems), fol-
lowed by basal insulin, followed by sulfonylureas or meglitinides. Combining treatment with insu-
lin and sulfonylureas also increases hypoglycemia risk. †Accounting for treatment plan and
diabetes subtype, the oldest individuals (aged $75 years) have the highest risk for hypogly-
cemia in type 2 diabetes; younger individuals with type 1 diabetes are also at very high
risk. ‡Tight glycemic control in randomized trials increases hypoglycemia rates. In observa-
tional studies, both low and high A1C are associated with hypoglycemia in a J-shaped rela-
tionship. §Includes factors associated with low income, such as being underinsured or living
in a socioeconomically deprived area.
diabetesjournals.org/care
Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia
S119
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

are), and follow up positive responses with
a more detailed evaluation (105,110).
Other notable clinical and biological risk
factorsforhypoglycemia areolderage, mul-
timorbidity, cognitive impairment, chronic
kidney disease and end-stage kidney dis-
ease in particular, CVD, depression, and
neuropathy (92,93). Female sex has also
been found to be an independent risk fac-
tor for hypoglycemia in multiple studies, al-
though the mechanisms of this relationship
are unclear and require further research
(92). Cognitive impairment has a strong bi-
directional association with hypoglycemia,
and recurrent severe hypoglycemic epi-
sodes were associated with a greater de-
cline in psychomotor and mental efﬁciency
after long-term follow-up of the DCCT/EDIC
cohort (111). Therefore, cognitive function
should be routinely assessed among older
adults with diabetes.
There are a number of important social,
cultural, and economic hypoglycemia risk
factors that should considered. Food inse-
curity is associated with increased risk of
hypoglycemia-related emergency depart-
ment visits and hospitalizations in low-
income households, and this was shown
to be mitigated by increased federal nutri-
tion program beneﬁts (112). In general, in-
dividuals with low annual household
incomes (93), individuals who live in so-
cioeconomically deprived areas (96), and
individuals who are underinsured (97) or
homeless (113) experience higher rates of
emergency department visits and hospital-
izations for hypoglycemia. Clinicians should
also be aware of cultural practices that
may
inﬂuence
glycemic
management
(which are discussed in detail in Section 5,
“Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors”),
such as fasting as part of religious obser-
vance. Fasting may increase the risk for hy-
poglycemia among individuals treated
with insulin or insulin secretagogues if not
properly planned for, so clinicians need to
engage these individuals to codevelop a di-
abetes treatment plan that is safe and re-
spectful of their traditions (114).
Young children with type 1 diabetes and
the elderly, including those with type 1 and
type 2 diabetes (115,116), are noted as be-
ing particularly vulnerable to hypoglycemia
becauseof theirreducedabilitytorecognize
hypoglycemic symptoms and effectively
communicate their needs. Individualized
glycemic goals, patient education, nutrition
intervention (e.g., bedtime snack to prevent
overnight hypoglycemia when speciﬁcally
needed to treat low blood glucose), physical
activity management, medication adjust-
ment,glucosemonitoring,androutineclinical
surveillance may improve outcomes (105).
CGM with automated low-glucose suspend
and automated insulin delivery systems have
been shown to be effective in reducing hypo-
glycemia in type 1 diabetes (117). For people
with type 1 diabetes with level 3 hypoglyce-
miaandhypoglycemiaunawarenessthatper-
sists despite medical treatment, human islet
transplantationmaybeanoption,buttheap-
proachremainsexperimental(118,119).
Hypoglycemia Treatment
Health care professionals should counsel
individuals with diabetes to treat hypogly-
cemia with fast-acting carbohydrates at
the hypoglycemia alert value of 70 mg/dL
(3.9 mmol/L) or less (120–122). Individu-
als should be counseled to recheck their
glucose 15 min after ingesting carbohy-
drates and to repeat carbohydrate ingestion
and seek care for ongoing hypoglycemia.
These instructions should be reviewed at
each clinical visit.
For most individuals, 15 g carbohydrates
should be ingested. Individuals using auto-
mated insulin delivery systems are recom-
mended to ingest 5–10 g carbohydrates
(except for hypoglycemia with exercise or
with signiﬁcant overestimation of carbohy-
drate/meal bolus) (123). The acute glyce-
mic response to food correlates better
with the glucose content than with the to-
tal carbohydrate content. Pure glucose is
the preferred treatment, but any form of
carbohydrate that contains glucose will
raise blood glucose. Added fat may slow
and then prolong the acute glycemic re-
sponse. Carbohydrate sources high in pro-
tein may increase insulin secretion and
should not be used to treat hypoglycemia
(124). Ongoing insulin activity or insulin
secretagogues may lead to recurrent hypo-
glycemia unless more food is ingested after
recovery.
Glucagon
The use of glucagon is indicated for the
treatment of hypoglycemia in people un-
able or unwilling to consume carbohy-
drates by mouth. All individuals treated
with insulin or who are at high riskof hypo-
glycemia as discussed above should be pre-
scribed glucagon. For these individuals,
clinicians should routinely review their ac-
cess to glucagon, as appropriate glucagon
prescribing is very low in current practice
(125,126). An individual does not need to
be a health care professional to safely ad-
minister glucagon. Those in close contact
with, or having custodial care of, these in-
dividuals (family members, roommates,
school personnel, childcare professionals,
correctional institution staff, or coworkers)
should be instructed on the use of gluca-
gon, including where the glucagon product
is kept and when and how to administer it.
It is essential that they be explicitly edu-
cated to never administer insulin to individ-
uals experiencing hypoglycemia. Glucagon
was traditionally dispensed as a powder that
requires reconstitution prior to injection.
However, intranasal and ready-to-inject glu-
cagon preparations are now widely available
andarepreferredduetotheireaseofadmin-
istration resulting in more rapid correction of
hypoglycemia (127–130). Although physical
and chemical stability of glucagon is im-
provedwithnewerformulations,careshould
be taken to replace glucagon products when
they reach their expiration date and store
glucagon based on speciﬁc product instruc-
tions to ensure safe and effective use. For
currently available glucagon products and
associated costs, see Table 6.6. Health insur-
ance providers may prefer only select gluca-
gon products, so it is important to check
individuals’insurancecoverageandprescribe
formularyproductswheneverpossible.
Hypoglycemia Prevention
A multicomponent hypoglycemia preven-
tion plan (Table 6.7) is critical to caring
for individuals at risk for hypoglycemia.
Hypoglycemia prevention begins by es-
tablishing an individual’s hypoglycemia
history and risk factors, as discussed in
HYPOGLYCEMIA RISK ASSESSMENT above. Structured
patient education for hypoglycemia pre-
vention and treatment is critical and has
been shown to improve hypoglycemia
outcomes (131,132). Education should
ideally be provided through a diabetes
self-management education and support
program or by a trained diabetes educa-
tor, although these services are not avail-
able in many areas (133,134). If structured
education is not available, clinicians should
educate individuals at risk for hypoglyce-
mia on hypoglycemia deﬁnitions, situa-
tions that may precipitate hypoglycemia
(fasting, delayed meals, physical activity,
and illness), blood glucose self-monitoring,
avoidance of driving with hypoglycemia, step-
by-step instructions on hypoglycemia treat-
ment as discussed above, and glucagon use
as appropriate (131).
S120
Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

CGM can be a valuable tool for detect-
ing and preventing hypoglycemia in many
individuals with diabetes, and it is recom-
mended for insulin-treated individuals, es-
pecially those using multiple daily insulin
injections or continuous subcutaneous in-
sulin infusion. There is clinical trial evidence
that CGM reduces rates of hypoglycemia in
these populations. CGM can reveal asymp-
tomatic hypoglycemia and help identify
patterns and precipitants of hypoglycemic
events (135,136). Real-time CGM can pro-
vide alarms that can warn individuals of
falling glucose so that they can intervene
(135,136). For more information on using
BGM and CGM for hypoglycemia preven-
tion, see Section 7, “Diabetes Technology.”
An essential component of hypoglycemia
prevention is appropriate modiﬁcation
to diabetes treatment in the setting of
intercurrent illness (discussed in detail
below) or to prevent recurrent hypogly-
cemic events. Level 2 or 3 hypoglycemic
events especially should trigger a reeval-
uation of the individual’s diabetestreatment
plan, with consideration of deintensiﬁcation
of therapy within individualized glycemic
goals.
Individuals with impaired awareness of
hypoglycemia beneﬁt from, and should
be referred to, training programs that can
reestablish awareness of hypoglycemia.
Fear of hypoglycemia and hypoglycemia
unawareness often cooccur, so interven-
tions aimed at treating one often beneﬁt
both (137). Formal, evidence-based train-
ing programs that have been developed
include the Blood Glucose Awareness Train-
ing Program, Dose Adjusted for Normal Eat-
ing (DAFNE), and DAFNEplus (138–140).
Where these programs are not available,
training can be provided through qualiﬁed
behavioral health professionals, diabetes
educators, or other professionals with expe-
rience in this area, although this approach
has not been evaluated in clinical trials. In
addition, several weeks of avoidance of hy-
poglycemia can improve counterregulation
and hypoglycemia awareness in many peo-
ple with diabetes (141). Hence, individuals
with one or more episodes of clinically sig-
niﬁcant hypoglycemia may beneﬁt from at
least short-term relaxation of glycemic goals
(142).
INTERCURRENT ILLNESS
Stressful events (e.g., illness, trauma, and
surgery) increase the risk for both hypergly-
cemia and hypoglycemia among individuals
with diabetes. In severe cases, they may
precipitate diabetic ketoacidosis or a non-
ketotic hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state,
life-threatening conditions that require im-
mediate medical care. Any individuals with
diabetes experiencing illness or other stress-
ful events should be assessed for the need
formorefrequent monitoring ofglucose; ke-
tosis-prone individuals also require urine or
blood ketone monitoring. Clinicians should
reevaluate diabetes treatment during these
events and make adjustments as appropri-
ate. Clinicians should be aware of medi-
cation interactions that may precipitate
hypoglycemia. Notably, sulfonylureas in-
teract with a number of commonly used
antimicrobials (ﬂuoroquinolones, clarithro-
mycin, sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim,
metronidazole, and ﬂuconazole) that can
dramatically increase their effective dose,
leading to hypoglycemia (143–145). Clini-
cians should consider temporarily decreas-
ing or stopping sulfonylureas when these
antimicrobials are prescribed.
For further information on management
hyperglycemia in the hospital, see Section
16, “Diabetes Care in the Hospital.”
Table 6.7—Components of hypoglycemia prevention for individuals at risk for
hypoglycemia at initial, follow-up, and annual visits
Hypoglycemia prevention action
Initial
visit
Every
follow-up visit
Annual
visit
Hypoglycemia history assessment



Hypoglycemia awareness assessment


Cognitive function and other hypoglycemia risk factor
assessment


Structured patient education for hypoglycemia
prevention and treatment

*
*
Consideration of continuous glucose monitoring needs



Reevaluation of diabetes treatment plan with
deintensiﬁcation, simpliﬁcation, or agent
modiﬁcation as appropriate

†
†
Glucagon prescription and training for close contacts
for insulin-treated individuals or those at high
hypoglycemic risk


Training to reestablish awareness of hypoglycemia
‡
‡
The listed frequencies are the recommended minimum; actions for hypoglycemia prevention
should be done more often as needed based on clinical judgment. *Indicated with recurrent
hypoglycemic events or at initiation of medication with a high risk for hypoglycemia.
†Indicated with any level 2 or 3 hypoglycemia, intercurrent illness, or initiating interacting
medications. ‡Indicated when impaired hypoglycemia awareness is detected.
Table 6.6—Median monthly (30-day) AWP and NADAC of glucagon formulations
in the U.S.
Product
Form(s)
Median AWP*
(min, max)
Median NADAC*
(min, max)
Dosage(s)
Glucagon
Injection powder
with diluent for
reconstitution
$266 ($194, $369)
$249 ($225, $273)
1 mg
Glucagon
Nasal powder
$337
$270
3 mg
Glucagon
Preﬁlled pen,
preﬁlled syringe
$368
$285
0.5 mg, 1 mg
Dasiglucagon
Preﬁlled pen,
preﬁlled syringe
$371
NA
0.6 mg
AWP, average wholesale price; max, maximum; min, minimum; NA, data not available; NADAC,
National Average Drug Acquisition Cost. AWP and NADAC prices are as of August 2023.
*Calculated per unit (AWP [147] or NADAC [148]; median AWP or NADAC is listed alone
when only one product and/or price is described).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia
S121
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

References
1. Deshmukh H, Wilmot EG, Gregory R, et al.
Effect of ﬂash glucose monitoring on glycemic
control, hypoglycemia, diabetes-related distress,
and resource utilization in the Association of
British Clinical Diabetologists (ABCD) nationwide
audit. Diabetes Care 2020;43:2153–2160
2. Laiteerapong N, Ham SA, Gao Y, et al. The
legacy effect in type 2 diabetes: impact of early
glycemic control on future complications (The
Diabetes & Aging Study). Diabetes Care 2019;42:
416–426
3. Stratton IM, Adler AI, Neil HA, et al. Association
of glycaemia with macrovascular and microvascular
complications of type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 35):
prospective observational study. BMJ 2000;321:
405–412
4. Little
RR,
Rohlﬁng
CL;
National
Glyco-
hemoglobin
Standardization
Program
(NGSP)
Steering Committee. Status of hemoglobin A1c
measurement and goals for improvement: from
chaos to order for improving diabetes care. Clin
Chem 2011;57:205–214
5. Jovanovic L, Savas H, Mehta M, Trujillo A,
Pettitt DJ. Frequent monitoring of A1C during
pregnancy as a treatment tool to guide therapy.
Diabetes Care 2011;34:53–54
6. Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes
(KDIGO) Diabetes Work Group. KDIGO 2020 clinical
practice guideline for diabetes management in
chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int 2020;98(4S):
S1–S115
7. National
Glycohemoglobin
Standardization
Program. HbA1c Assay Interferences. HbA1c
methods: effects of hemoglobin variants (HbC,
HbS, HbE and HbD traits) and elevated fetal
hemoglobin (HbF), 2022. Accessed 14 August
2023. Available from https://ngsp.org/interf.asp
8. Sacks DB, Arnold M, Bakris GL, et al.
Guidelines and recommendations for laboratory
analysis in the diagnosis and management of
diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care 2023;46:e151–
e199
9. Bergenstal RM, Gal RL, Connor CG, et al.; T1D
Exchange Racial Differences Study Group. Racial
differences in the relationship of glucose con-
centrations and hemoglobin A1c levels. Ann
Intern Med 2017;167:95–102
10. Herman WH, Ma Y, Uwaifo G, et al.; Diabetes
Prevention Program Research Group. Differences
in A1C by race and ethnicity among patients with
impaired glucose tolerance in the Diabetes
Prevention Program. Diabetes Care 2007;30:
2453–2457
11. Saaddine JB, Fagot-Campagna A, Rolka D,
et al. Distribution of HbA(1c) levels for children
and young adults in the U.S.: Third National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Dia-
betes Care 2002;25:1326–1330
12. Selvin
E,
Steffes
MW,
Ballantyne
CM,
Hoogeveen RC, Coresh J, Brancati FL. Racial
differences in glycemic markers: a cross-sectional
analysis of community-based data. Ann Intern
Med 2011;154:303–309
13. Wheeler E, Leong A, Liu CT, et al.; EPIC-CVD
Consortium; EPIC-InterAct Consortium; Lifelines
Cohort Study. Impact of common genetic deter-
minants of hemoglobin A1c on type 2 diabetes risk
and diagnosis in ancestrally diverse populations: a
transethnic genome-wide meta-analysis. PLoS Med
2017;14:e1002383
14. Parrinello CM, Selvin E. Beyond HbA1c and
glucose: the role of nontraditional glycemic
markers in diabetes diagnosis, prognosis, and
management. Curr Diab Rep 2014;14:548
15. Rooney MR, Daya N, Tang O, et al. Glycated
albumin and risk of mortality in the US adult
population. Clin Chem 2022;68:422–430
16. Selvin E, Rawlings AM, Lutsey PL, et al.
Fructosamine and glycated albumin and the risk
of cardiovascular outcomes and death. Cir-
culation 2015;132:269–277
17. Selvin E, Rawlings AM, Grams M, et al.
Fructosamine and glycated albumin for risk
stratiﬁcation and prediction of incident diabetes
and microvascular complications: a prospective
cohort analysis of the Atherosclerosis Risk in
Communities (ARIC) study. Lancet Diabetes Endo-
crinol 2014;2:279–288
18. Nathan DM, McGee P, Steffes MW, Lachin
JM; DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Relationship of
glycated albumin to blood glucose and HbA1c
values and to retinopathy, nephropathy, and
cardiovascular outcomes in the DCCT/EDIC study.
Diabetes 2014;63:282–290
19. Nathan DM, Kuenen J, Borg R, Zheng H,
Schoenfeld D; A1c-Derived Average Glucose
Study Group. Translating the A1C assay into
estimated average glucose values. Diabetes Care
2008;31:1473–1478
20. Wei N, Zheng H, Nathan DM. Empirically
establishing blood glucose targets to achieve
HbA1c goals. Diabetes Care 2014;37:1048–1051
21. Holt RIG, DeVries JH, Hess-Fischl A, et al.The
management of type 1 diabetes in adults. A
consensus report by the American Diabetes
Association (ADA) and the European Association
for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care
2021;44:2589–2625
22. Valenzano M, Cibrario Bertolotti I,Valenzano
A, Grassi G. Time in range-A1c hemoglobin
relationship in continuous glucose monitoring of
type 1 diabetes: a real-world study. BMJ Open
Diabetes Res Care 2021;9:e001045
23. Fabris C, Heinemann L, Beck R, Cobelli C,
Kovatchev B. Estimation of hemoglobin A1c from
continuous glucose monitoring data in individuals
with type 1 diabetes: is time in range all we need?
Diabetes Technol Ther 2020;22:501–508
24. Ranjan AG, Rosenlund SV, Hansen TW,
Rossing P, Andersen S, Nørgaard K. Improved time
in range over 1 year is associated with reduced
albuminuria in individuals with sensor-augmented
insulin pump-treated type 1 diabetes. Diabetes
Care 2020;43:2882–2885
25. Beck RW, Bergenstal RM, Cheng P, et al. The
relationships between time in range, hyper-
glycemia metrics, and HbA1c. J Diabetes Sci
Technol 2019;13:614–626
26. Soupal J, Petruzelkova L, Grunberger G, et al.
Glycemic outcomes in adults with T1D are
impacted more by continuous glucose monitoring
than by insulin delivery method: 3 years of follow-
up from the COMISAIR study. Diabetes Care
2020;43:37–43
27. Advani A. Positioning time in range in diabetes
management. Diabetologia 2020;63:242–252
28. Vigersky RA, McMahon C.The relationship of
hemoglobin A1C to time-in-range in patients
with diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:
81–85
29. Avari P, Uduku C, George D, Herrero P, Reddy
M, Oliver N. Differences for percentage times in
glycemic
range
between
continuous
glucose
monitoring and capillary blood glucose monitoring
in adults with type 1 diabetes: analysis of the
REPLACE-BG dataset. Diabetes Technol Ther 2020;
22:222–227
30. Kr€oger J, Reichel A, Siegmund T, Ziegler R.
Clinical recommendations for the use of the
ambulatory glucose proﬁle in diabetes care. J
Diabetes Sci Technol 2020;14:586–594
31. Livingstone R, Boyle JG, Petrie JR. How
tightly controlled do ﬂuctuations in blood glucose
levels need to be to reduce the risk of developing
complications in people with type 1 diabetes?
Diabet Med 2020;37:513–521
32. Battelino T, Danne T, Bergenstal RM, et al.
Clinical targets for continuous glucose monitoring
data interpretation: recommendations from the
International Consensus on Time in Range. Dia-
betes Care 2019;42:1593–1603
33. Tchero H, Kangambega P, Briatte C, Brunet-
Houdard S, Retali GR, Rusch E. Clinical effectiveness
of telemedicine in diabetes mellitus: a meta-
analysis of 42 randomized controlled trials.Telemed
J E Health 2019;25:569–583
34. Salabelle C, Ly Sall K, Eroukhmanoff J, et al.
COVID-19 pandemic lockdown in young people
with type 1 diabetes: positive results of an
unprecedented challenge for patients through
telemedicine and change in use of continuous
glucose monitoring. Prim Care Diabetes 2021;15:
884–886
35. Prabhu Navis J, Leelarathna L, Mubita W,
et al. Impact of COVID-19 lockdown on ﬂash and
real-time glucose sensor users with type 1
diabetes in England. Acta Diabetol 2021;58:231–
237
36. Inzucchi SE, Bergenstal RM, Buse JB, et al.
Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes,
2015: a patient-centered approach: update to a
position statement of the American Diabetes
Association and the European Association for the
Study of Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2015;38:140–149
37. Whitehead L, Glass C, Coppell K. The
effectiveness of goal setting on glycaemic control
for people with type 2 diabetes and prediabetes:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Adv
Nurs 2022;78:1212–1227
38. Nathan DM, Genuth S, Lachin J, et al.;
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research
Group. The effect of intensive treatment of
diabetes on the development and progression of
long-term
complications
in
insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med 1993;329:977–986
39. Lachin JM, White NH, Hainsworth DP, Sun W,
Cleary PA; Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
(DCCT)/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and
Complications (EDIC) Research Group. Effect of
intensive diabetes therapy on the progression of
diabetic retinopathy in patients with type 1
diabetes: 18 years of follow-up in the DCCT/EDIC.
Diabetes 2015;64:631–642
40. Lachin JM, Genuth S, Cleary P, Davis MD;
Diabetes
Control
and
Complications
Trial/
Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and
Complications Research Group. Retinopathy and
nephropathy in patients with type 1 diabetes
four years after a trial of intensive therapy. N
Engl J Med 2000;342:381–389
41. Ohkubo Y, Kishikawa H, Araki E, et al.
Intensive insulin therapy prevents the progression
of diabetic microvascular complications in Japanese
patients with non-insulin-dependentdiabetes mellitus:
S122
Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

a randomized prospective 6-year study. Diabetes Res
Clin Pract1995;28:103–117
42. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS)
Group. Effect of intensive blood-glucose control
with metformin on complications in overweight
patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 34). Lancet
1998;352:854–865
43. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group.
Intensive blood-glucose control with sulphonylureas
or insulin compared with conventional treatment
and risk of complications in patients with type 2
diabetes (UKPDS 33). Lancet 1998;352:837–853
44. Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, Matthews
DR, Neil HA. 10-Year follow-up of intensive
glucose control in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med
2008;359:1577–1589
45. Lind M, Pivodic A, Svensson AM, Olafsdottir
AF, Wedel H, Ludvigsson J. HbA1c level as a risk
factor for retinopathy and nephropathy in children
and adults with type 1 diabetes: Swedish population
based cohort study. BMJ 2019;366:l4894
46. Adler AI, Stratton IM, Neil HA, et al.
Association of systolic blood pressure with
macrovascular and microvascular complications
of type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 36): prospective
observational study. BMJ 2000;321:412–419
47. Duckworth W, Abraira C, Moritz T, et al.;
VADT Investigators. Glucose control and vascular
complications in veterans with type 2 diabetes. N
Engl J Med 2009;360:129–139
48. Patel A, MacMahon S, Chalmers J, et al.;
ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Intensive blood
glucose control and vascular outcomes in patients
with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;358:
2560–2572
49. Ismail-Beigi F, Craven T, Banerji MA, et al.;
ACCORD Trial Group. Effect of intensive treatment
of hyperglycaemia on microvascular outcomes in
type 2 diabetes: an analysis of the ACCORD
randomised trial. Lancet 2010;376:419–430
50. Gerstein HC, Miller ME, Byington RP, et al.;
Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes
Study Group. Effects of intensive glucose lowering
in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;358:2545–
2559
51. Agrawal L, Azad N, Bahn GD, et al.; VADT
Study Group. Intensive glycemic control improves
long-term renal outcomes in type 2 diabetes in
the Veterans Affairs
Diabetes
Trial
(VADT).
Diabetes Care 2019;42:e181–e182
52. Rawshani A, Rawshani A, Franzen S, et al.
Mortality and cardiovascular disease in type 1 and
type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;376:1407–1418
53. Skyler JS, Bergenstal R, Bonow RO, et al.;
American Diabetes Association; American College
of
Cardiology
Foundation;
American
Heart
Association. Intensive glycemic control and the
prevention of cardiovascular events: implications
of the ACCORD, ADVANCE, and VA diabetes trials:
a position statement of the American Diabetes
Association and a scientiﬁc statement of the
American College of Cardiology Foundation and
the American Heart Association. Diabetes Care
2009;32:187–192
54. Turnbull FM, Abraira C, Anderson RJ, et al.;
Control Group. Intensive glucose control and
macrovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes.
Diabetologia 2009;52:2288–2298
55. Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
(DCCT)/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions
and Complications (EDIC) Study Research Group.
Intensive diabetes treatment and cardiovascular
outcomes in type 1 diabetes: the DCCT/EDIC
study 30-year follow-up. Diabetes Care 2016;39:
686–693
56. Nathan DM, Zinman B, Cleary PA, et al.;
Diabetes
Control
and
Complications
Trial/
Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and
Complications
(DCCT/EDIC) Research
Group.
Modern-day clinical course of type 1 diabetes
mellitus after 30 years’ duration: the diabetes
control and complications trial/epidemiology of
diabetes interventions and complications and
Pittsburgh epidemiology of diabetes compli-
cations experience (1983-2005). Arch Intern
Med 2009;169:1307–1316
57. Hayward RA, Reaven PD, Wiitala WL, et al.;
VADT Investigators. Follow-up of glycemic control
and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes.
N Engl J Med 2015;372:2197–2206
58. Di Angelantonio E, Kaptoge S, Wormser D,
et al.; Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration.
Association of cardiometabolic multimorbidity
with mortality. JAMA 2015;314:52–60
59. Zoungas S, Chalmers J, Neal B, et al.;
ADVANCE-ON Collaborative Group. Follow-up of
blood-pressure lowering and glucose control in
type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2014;371:1392–
1406
60. ACCORD Study Group. Nine-year effects of 3.7
years of intensive glycemic control on cardiovascular
outcomes. Diabetes Care 2016;39:701–708
61. Buse JB, Bain SC, Mann JFE, et al.; LEADER
Trial Investigators. Cardiovascular risk reduction
with
liraglutide:
an
exploratory
mediation
analysis of the LEADER trial. Diabetes Care
2020;43:1546–1552
62. Lee AK, Warren B, Lee CJ, et al. The
association of severe hypoglycemia with incident
cardiovascular events and mortality in adults
with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2018;41:
104–111
63. Davies MJ, D’Alessio DA, Fradkin J, et al.
Management
of
hyperglycemia
in
type
2
diabetes, 2018. A consensus report by the
American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the
European Association for the Study of Diabetes
(EASD). Diabetes Care 2018;41:2669–2701
64. Zoungas S, Woodward M, Li Q, et al.;
ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Impact of age,
age at diagnosis and duration of diabetes on the
risk of macrovascular and microvascular compli-
cations and death in type 2 diabetes. Dia-
betologia 2014;57:2465–2474
65. Munshi MN, Slyne C, Segal AR, Saul N, Lyons
C, Weinger K. Simpliﬁcation of insulin regimen in
older adults and risk of hypoglycemia. JAMA
Intern Med 2016;176:1023–1025
66. Pratley RE, Rosenstock J, Heller SR, et al.
Reduced
glucose
variability
with
glucose-
dependent versus glucose-independent therapies
despite similar glucose control and hypoglycemia
rates in a randomized, controlled study of older
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Diabetes
Sci Technol 2018;12:1184–1191
67. Heller SR, Pratley RE, Sinclair A, et al.
Glycaemic outcomes of an individualized treatment
approach for older vulnerable patients: a ran-
domized, controlled study in type 2 diabetes
mellitus (IMPERIUM). Diabetes Obes Metab 2018;
20:148–156
68. Sinclair AJ, Heller SR, Pratley RE, et al.
Evaluating glucose-lowering treatment in older
people with diabetes: lessons from the IMPERIUM
trial. Diabetes Obes Metab 2020;22:1231–1242
69. Pilla SJ, Meza KA, Schoenborn NL, Boyd CM,
Maruthur NM, Chander G. A qualitative study of
perspectives of older adults on deintensifying
diabetes medications. J Gen Intern Med 2023;38:
1008–1015
70. Agiostratidou G, Anhalt H, Ball D, et al.
Standardizing
clinically
meaningful
outcome
measures beyond HbA1c for type 1 diabetes: a
consensus report of the American Association of
Clinical Endocrinologists, the American Asso-
ciation of Diabetes Educators, the American
Diabetes Association, the Endocrine Society,
JDRF International, The Leona M. and Harry B.
Helmsley
Charitable
Trust,
the
Pediatric
Endocrine Society, and the T1D Exchange.
Diabetes Care 2017;40:1622–1630
71. Hepburn DA, Deary IJ, MacLeod KM, Frier
BM. Structural equation modeling of symptoms,
awareness
and
fear
of
hypoglycemia,
and
personality
in
patients
with
insulin-treated
diabetes. Diabetes Care 1994;17:1273–1280
72. Polonsky WH, Fortmann AL, Price D, Fisher L.
“Hyperglycemia aversiveness”: investigating an
overlooked problem among adults with type 1
diabetes. J Diabetes Complications 2021;35:107925
73. Amiel SA, Potts L, Goldsmith K, et al. A parallel
randomised controlled trial of the Hypoglycaemia
Awareness Restoration Programme for adults with
type 1 diabetes and problematic hypoglycaemia
despite
optimised
self-care
(HARPdoc).
Nat
Commun 2022;13:2229
74. Sreenan
S,
Andersen
M, Thorsted
BL,
Wolden ML, Evans M. Increased risk of severe
hypoglycemic events with increasing frequency
of non-severe hypoglycemic events in patients
with type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Ther
2014;5:447–458
75. Bonds DE, Miller ME, Bergenstal RM, et al.
The association between symptomatic, severe
hypoglycaemia and mortality in type 2 diabetes:
retrospective epidemiological analysis of the
ACCORD study. BMJ 2010;340:b4909
76. Zoungas S, Patel A, Chalmers J, et al.; ADVANCE
Collaborative Group. Severe hypoglycemia and risks
of vascular events and death. N Engl J Med
2010;363:1410–1418
77. McCoy RG, Van Houten HK, Ziegenfuss JY,
Shah ND, Wermers RA, Smith SA. Increased
mortality of patients with diabetes reporting
severe hypoglycemia. Diabetes Care 2012;35:
1897–1901
78. Bloomﬁeld HE, Greer N, Newman D, et al.
Predictors and Consequences of Severe Hypo-
glycemia in Adults with Diabetes—A Systematic
Review
of
the
Evidence. Washington,
DC,
Department of Veterans Affairs, 2012. Accessed
8 August 2023. Available from https://www.ncbi
.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK114893/
79. Barendse S, Singh H, Frier BM, Speight J.The
impact of hypoglycaemia on quality of life and
related patient-reported outcomes in type 2
diabetes: a narrative review. Diabet Med 2012;
29:293–302
80. McCoy RG, Van Houten HK, Ziegenfuss JY,
Shah ND, Wermers RA, Smith SA. Self-report of
hypoglycemia and health-related quality of life in
patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Endocr
Pract 2013;19:792–799
81. Leiter LA, Boras D,Woo VC. Dosing irregularities
and self-treated hypoglycemia in type 2 diabetes:
diabetesjournals.org/care
Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia
S123
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

results from the Canadian cohort of an international
survey of patients and healthcare professionals. Can J
Diabetes 2014;38:38–44
82. Ghandi K, Pieri B, Dornhorst A, Hussain S. A
comparison of validated methods used to assess
impaired awareness of hypoglycaemia in type 1
diabetes: an observational study. Diabetes Ther
2021;12:441–451
83. Khunti K, Alsifri S, Aronson R, et al.; HAT
Investigator Group. Impact of hypoglycaemia on
patient-reported
outcomes
from
a
global,
24-country study of 27,585 people with type 1
and insulin-treated type 2 diabetes. Diabetes
Res Clin Pract 2017;130:121–129
84. Choudhary P, Amiel SA. Hypoglycaemia in
type 1 diabetes: technological treatments, their
limitations and the place of psychology. Dia-
betologia 2018;61:761–769
85. Hopkins D, Lawrence I, Mansell P, et al.
Improved biomedical and psychological outcomes
1 year after structured education in ﬂexible
insulin therapy for people with type 1 diabetes:
the
U.K.
DAFNE experience.
Diabetes
Care
2012;35:1638–1642
86. Karter AJ, Moffet HH, Liu JY, Lipska KJ.
Surveillance
of
hypoglycemia-limitations
of
emergency department and hospital utilization
data. JAMA Intern Med 2018;178:987–988
87. Lee AK, Lee CJ, Huang ES, Sharrett AR,
Coresh J, Selvin E. Risk factors for severe
hypoglycemia in black and white adults with
diabetes: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities
(ARIC) study. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1661–1667
88. Pilla SJ, Kraschnewski JL, Lehman EB, et al.
Hospital utilization for hypoglycemia among
patients with type 2 diabetes using pooled data
from six health systems. BMJ Open Diabetes Res
Care 2021;9(Suppl. 1):e002153
89. McCoy RG, Herrin J, Galindo RJ, et al. Rates
of hypoglycemic and hyperglycemic emergencies
among U.S. adults with diabetes, 2011-2020.
Diabetes Care 2023;46:e69–e71
90. Mattishent
K,
Loke
YK.
Detection
of
asymptomatic drug-induced hypoglycemia using
continuous glucose monitoring in older people—
systematic review. J Diabetes Complications
2018;32:805–812
91. Au NH, Ratzki-Leewing A, Zou G, et al. Real-
world incidence and risk factors for daytime and
nocturnal non-severe hypoglycemia in adults
with type 2 diabetes mellitus on insulin and/or
secretagogues (InHypo-DM Study, Canada). Can J
Diabetes 2022;46:196–203.e2
92. Silbert R, Salcido-Montenegro A, Rodriguez-
Gutierrez R, Katabi A, McCoy RG. Hypoglycemia
among patients with type 2 diabetes: epidemiology,
risk factors, and prevention strategies. Curr Diab
Rep 2018;18:53
93. McCoy RG, Lipska KJ, Van Houten HK, Shah
ND. Association of cumulative multimorbidity,
glycemic control, and medication use with
hypoglycemia-related emergency department
visits and hospitalizations among adults with
diabetes. JAMA Netw Open 2020;3:e1919099
94. Yun JS, Ko SH, Ko SH, et al. Presence of
macroalbuminuria predicts severe hypoglycemia
in patients with type 2 diabetes: a 10-year follow-
up study. Diabetes Care 2013;36:1283–1289
95. Galindo RJ, Ali MK, Funni SA, et al.
Hypoglycemic and hyperglycemic crises among
U.S. adults with diabetes and end-stage kidney
disease:
population-based
study,
2013-2017.
Diabetes Care 2022;45:100–107
96. Kurani SS, Heien HC, Sangaralingham LR, et al.
Association
of
area-level
socioeconomic
de-
privation with hypoglycemic and hyperglycemic
crises in US adults with diabetes. JAMA Netw
Open 2022;5:e2143597
97. Jiang DH, Herrin J,Van Houten HK, McCoy RG.
Evaluation of high-deductible health plans and
acute glycemic complications among adults with
diabetes. JAMA Netw Open 2023;6:e2250602
98. Karter AJ, Warton EM, Lipska KJ, et al.
Development and validation of a tool to identify
patients with type 2 diabetes at high risk of
hypoglycemia-related emergency department or
hospital use. JAMA Intern Med 2017;177:1461–
1470
99. Karter AJ, Warton EM, Moffet HH, et al.
Revalidation of the hypoglycemia risk stratiﬁcation
tool using ICD-10 codes. Diabetes Care 2019;42:
e58–e59
100. Chow LS, Zmora R, Ma S, Seaquist ER,
Schreiner PJ. Development of a model to predict
5-year risk of severe hypoglycemia in patients
with type 2 diabetes. BMJ Open Diabetes Res
Care 2018;6:e000527
101. Miller CD, Phillips LS, Ziemer DC, Gallina DL,
Cook CB, El-Kebbi IM. Hypoglycemia in patients
with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Arch Intern Med
2001;161:1653–1659
102. Davis TM, Brown SG, Jacobs IG, Bulsara M,
Bruce DG, Davis WA. Determinants of severe
hypoglycemia complicating type 2 diabetes: the
Fremantle diabetes study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2010;95:2240–2247
103. Quilliam BJ, Simeone JC, Ozbay AB. Risk
factors for hypoglycemia-related hospitalization
in patients with type 2 diabetes: a nested case-
control study. Clin Ther 2011;33:1781–1791
104. Pilla SJ, Park J, Schwartz JL, et al. Hypo-
glycemia communication in primary care visits
for patients with diabetes. J Gen Intern Med
2021;36:1533–1542
105. Seaquist ER, Anderson J, Childs B, et al.
Hypoglycemia and diabetes: a report of a
workgroup of the American Diabetes Association
and the Endocrine Society. Diabetes Care 2013;
36:1384–1395
106. Wild
D,
von
Maltzahn
R,
Brohan
E,
Christensen T, Clauson P, Gonder-Frederick L. A
critical review of the literature on fear of
hypoglycemia
in
diabetes:
implications
for
diabetes management and patient education.
Patient Educ Couns 2007;68:10–15
107. Schopman JE, Geddes J, Frier BM. Prevalence
of impaired awareness of hypoglycaemia and
frequency of hypoglycaemia in insulin-treated type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2010;87:64–68
108. Clarke WL, Cox DJ, Gonder-Frederick LA,
Julian D, Schlundt D, Polonsky W. Reduced
awareness of hypoglycemia in adults with IDDM.
A prospective study of hypoglycemic frequency
and associated symptoms. Diabetes Care 1995;
18:517–522
109. Gold
AE,
MacLeod
KM,
Frier
BM.
Frequency of severe hypoglycemia in patients
with type I diabetes with impaired awareness of
hypoglycemia. Diabetes Care 1994;17:697–703
110. Pedersen-Bjergaard U, Agerholm-Larsen B,
Pramming S, Hougaard P, Thorsteinsson B.
Activity of angiotensin-converting enzyme and
risk of severe hypoglycaemia in type 1 diabetes
mellitus. Lancet 2001;357:1248–1253
111. Jacobson AM, Ryan CM, Braffett BH, et al.;
DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Cognitive performance
declines in older adults with type 1 diabetes:
results from 32 years of follow-up in the DCCT and
EDIC Study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2021;9:
436–445
112. Basu S, Berkowitz SA, Seligman H. The
monthly cycle of hypoglycemia: an observational
claims-based study of emergency room visits,
hospital admissions, and costs in a commercially
insured population. Med Care 2017;55:639–645
113. Sharan R, Wiens K, Ronksley PE, et al. The
association of homelessness with rates of diabetes
complications: a population-based cohort study.
Diabetes Care 2023;46:1469–1476
114. Ibrahim M, Davies MJ, Ahmad E, et al.
Recommendations for management of diabetes
during Ramadan: update 2020, applying the
principles of the ADA/EASD consensus. BMJ
Open Diabetes Res Care 2020;8:e001248
115. Whitmer RA, Karter AJ,Yaffe K, Quesenberry
CP Jr, Selby JV. Hypoglycemic episodes and risk of
dementia in older patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus. JAMA 2009;301:1565–1572
116. DuBose SN, Weinstock RS, Beck RW, et al.
Hypoglycemia in older adults with type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2016;18:765–
771
117. Bergenstal RM, Klonoff DC, Garg SK, et al.;
ASPIRE In-Home Study Group. Threshold-based
insulin-pump
interruption
for
reduction
of
hypoglycemia. N Engl J Med 2013;369:224–232
118. Hering BJ, Clarke WR, Bridges ND, et al.;
Clinical Islet Transplantation Consortium. Phase 3
trial of transplantation of human islets in type 1
diabetes complicated by severe hypoglycemia.
Diabetes Care 2016;39:1230–1240
119. Harlan DM. Islet transplantation for hypo-
glycemia unawareness/severe hypoglycemia: caveat
emptor. Diabetes Care 2016;39:1072–1074
120. McTavish L,Wiltshire E. Effective treatment
of hypoglycemia in children with type 1 diabetes:
a randomized controlled clinical trial. Pediatr
Diabetes 2011;12:381–387
121. McTavish L, Corley B,Weatherall M,Wiltshire E,
Krebs JD. Weight-based carbohydrate treatment of
hypoglycaemia in people with type 1 diabetes using
insulin pump therapy: a randomized crossover clinical
trial.DiabetMed 2018;35:339–346
122. Georgakopoulos K, Katsilambros N, Fragaki M,
et al. Recovery from insulin-induced hypoglycemia
after saccharose or glucose administration. Clin
Physiol Biochem 1990;8:267–272
123. Danne T, Nimri R, Battelino T, et al.
International consensus on use of continuous
glucose monitoring. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1631–
1640
124. Layman DK, Clifton P, Gannon MC, Krauss
RM, Nuttall FQ. Protein in optimal health: heart
disease and type 2 diabetes. Am J Clin Nutr
2008;87:1571S–1575S
125. Kahn PA, Liu S, McCoy R, Gabbay RA, Lipska
K. Glucagon use by U.S. adults with type 1 and
type 2 diabetes. J Diabetes Complications 2021;
35:107882
126. Herges JR, Galindo RJ, Neumiller JJ, Heien HC,
Umpierrez GE, McCoy RG. Glucagon prescribing and
costs among U.S. adults with diabetes, 2011-2021.
Diabetes Care 2023;46:620–627
S124
Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

127. Matsuhisa M, Takita Y, Nasu R, Nagai Y,
Ohwaki K, Nagashima H. Nasal glucagon as a
viable alternative for treating insulin-induced
hypoglycaemia in Japanese patients with type 1
or type 2 diabetes: a phase 3 randomized
crossover study. Diabetes Obes Metab 2020;22:
1167–1175
128. Suico JG, H€ovelmann U, Zhang S, et al.
Glucagon administration by nasal and intramuscular
routes in adults with type 1 diabetes during insulin-
induced hypoglycaemia: a randomised, open-label,
crossover study. Diabetes Ther 2020;11:1591–1603
129. Pieber TR, Aronson R, H€ovelmann U, et al.
Dasiglucagon—a next-generation glucagon analog
for rapid and effective treatment of severe
hypoglycemia: results of phase 3 randomized
double-blind clinical trial. Diabetes Care 2021;44:
1361–1367
130. Pieber TR, Aronson R, Christiansen MP,
Bode B, Junaidi K, Conoscenti V. Efﬁcacy, safety,
tolerability, and noninferiority phase 3 study of
glucagon as a ready-to-use room temperature
liquid stable formulation versus a lyophilised
formulation for the biochemical recovery and
symptomatic relief of insulin-induced severe
hypoglycaemia in adults with type 1 diabetes.
Diabetes Obes Metab 2022;24:1394–1397
131. Powers MA, Bardsley JK, Cypress M, et al.
Diabetes self-management education and support
in adults with type 2 diabetes: a consensus
report of the American Diabetes Association, the
Association
of
Diabetes Care &
Education
Specialists, the
Academy
of
Nutrition
and
Dietetics, the American Academy of Family
Physicians, the American Academy of PAs, the
American Association of Nurse Practitioners, and
the American Pharmacists Association. Diabetes
Care 2020;43:1636–1649
132. LaManna J, Litchman ML, Dickinson JK, et al.
Diabetes
education
impact
on
hypoglycemia
outcomes: a systematic review of evidence and
gaps in the literature. Diabetes Educ 2019;45:349–
369
133. Strawbridge LM, Lloyd JT, Meadow A, Riley
GF, Howell BL. Use of Medicare’s diabetes self-
management training beneﬁt. Health Educ Behav
2015;42:530–538
134. Rutledge SA, Masalovich S, Blacher RJ,
Saunders MM. Diabetes self-management edu-
cation programs in nonmetropolitan counties—
United States, 2016. MMWR Surveill Summ 2017;
66:1–6
135. Hermanns N, Heinemann L, Freckmann G,
Waldenmaier D, Ehrmann D. Impact of CGM on
the management of hypoglycemia problems:
overview and secondary analysis of the HypoDE
Study. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2019;13:636–644
136. Heinemann L, Freckmann G, Ehrmann D,
et al. Real-time continuous glucose monitoring in
adults with type 1 diabetes and impaired hypo-
glycaemia awareness or severe hypoglycaemia
treated
with
multiple
daily
insulin
injections
(HypoDE): a multicentre, randomised controlled
trial. Lancet 2018;391:1367–1377
137. Yeoh E, Choudhary P, Nwokolo M, Ayis S,
Amiel SA. Interventions that restore awareness
of hypoglycemia in adults with type 1 diabetes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes
Care 2015;38:1592–1609
138. Cox DJ, Gonder-Frederick L, Polonsky W,
Schlundt D, Kovatchev B, Clarke W. Blood glucose
awareness training (BGAT-2): long-term beneﬁts.
Diabetes Care 2001;24:637–642
139. DAFNE Study Group. Training in ﬂexible,
intensive insulin management to enable dietary
freedom in people with type 1 diabetes: dose
adjustment for normal eating (DAFNE) randomised
controlled trial. BMJ 2002;325:746
140. Stanton-Fay SH, Hamilton K, Chadwick PM,
et al.; DAFNEplus study group. The DAFNEplus
programme for sustained type 1 diabetes self
management: intervention development using
the Behaviour Change Wheel. Diabet Med 2021;
38:e14548
141. Cryer PE. Diverse causes of hypoglycemia-
associated autonomic failure in diabetes. N Engl J
Med 2004;350:2272–2279
142. Mitchell BD, He X, Sturdy IM, Cagle AP, Settles
JA. Glucagon prescription patterns in patients with
either type 1 or 2 diabetes with newly prescribed
insulin. Endocr Pract 2016;22:123–135
143. Parekh TM, Raji M, Lin YL, Tan A, Kuo YF,
Goodwin JS. Hypoglycemia after antimicrobial drug
prescription for older patients using sulfonylureas.
JAMA Intern Med 2014;174:1605–1612
144. Lee S, Ock M, Kim HS, Kim H. Effects of co-
administration of sulfonylureas and antimicrobial
drugs on hypoglycemia in patients with type 2
diabetes using a case-crossover design. Pharma-
cotherapy 2020;40:902–912
145. Pilla
SJ,
Pitts
SI,
Maruthur
NM.
High
concurrent use of sulfonylureas and antimicrobials
with drug interactions causing hypoglycemia. J
Patient Saf 2022;18:e217–e224
146. Misra-Hebert AD, Pantalone KM, Ji X, et al.
Patient characteristics associated with severe
hypoglycemia in a type 2 diabetes cohort in a
large, integrated health care system from 2006 to
2015. Diabetes Care 2018;41:1164–1171
147. Merative. Micromedex RED BOOK (electronic
version). Ann Arbor, MI, Merative. Accessed 22 August
2023. Available from https://www.merative.com/
clinical-decision-support
148. U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services.
NADAC
(National
Average
Drug
Acquisition Cost) 2023. Accessed 22 Aug 2023.
Available from https://data.medicaid.gov/dataset/
4a00010a-132b-4e4d-a611-543c9521280f
diabetesjournals.org/care
Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia
S125
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

7. Diabetes Technology: Standards
of Care in Diabetes—2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S126–S144 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S007
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes
the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the
components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to
evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee, an
interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of
Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA
standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s
clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee
members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to com-
ment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
Diabetes technology is the term used to describe the hardware, devices, and soft-
ware that people with diabetes use to assist with self-management, ranging from
lifestyle modiﬁcations to glucose monitoring and therapy adjustments. Historically,
diabetes technology has been divided into two main categories: insulin administered
by syringe, pen, patch devices, or pump (also called continuous subcutaneous insulin
infusion [CSII]) and glucose as assessed by blood glucose monitoring (BGM) or con-
tinuous glucose monitoring (CGM). Diabetes technology has expanded to include au-
tomated insulin delivery (AID) systems, where CGM-informed algorithms modulate
insulin delivery, connected insulin pens, as well as diabetes self-management support
software serving as medical devices. Diabetes technology, when coupled with educa-
tion, follow-up, and support, can improve the lives and health of people with diabe-
tes; however, the complexity and rapid evolution of the diabetes technology
landscape can also be a barrier to implementation for people with diabetes, their
care partners, and the health care team.
GENERAL DEVICE PRINCIPLES
Recommendations
7.1 Diabetes devices should be offered to people with diabetes. A
7.2 Initiation of continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) should be offered to
people with type 1 diabetes early in the disease, even at time of diagnosis. A
7.3 Consider establishing competencies based on role in practice setting for
health care professionals working with diabetes technology. E
7.4 The type(s) and selection of devices should be individualized based on a
person’s speciﬁc needs, preferences, and skill level. In the setting of an indi-
vidual whose diabetes is partially or wholly managed by someone else (e.g., a
young child or a person with cognitive impairment or dexterity, psychosocial,
and/or physical limitations), the caregiver’s skills and preferences are integral
to the decision-making process. E
*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee. 7. Diabetes
technology: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2024.
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S126–S144
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
7. DIABETES TECHNOLOGY
S126
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

7.5 When prescribing a device, en-
sure that people with diabetes and
caregivers receive initial and ongo-
ing education and training, either in
person or remotely, and ongoing eval-
uation of technique, results, and the
ability to utilize data, including up-
loading/sharing data (if applicable), to
monitor and adjust therapy. C
7.6 People with diabetes who have
been using CGM, continuous subcuta-
neous insulin infusion (CSII), and/or
automated insulin delivery (AID) for
diabetes management should have
continued access across third-party
payers, regardless of age or A1C lev-
els. E
7.7 Students should be supported at
school in the use of diabetes technol-
ogy, such as CGM systems, CSII, con-
nected insulin pens, and AID systems,
as recommended or prescribed by their
health care team. E
7.8 Initiation of CSII and/or AID early,
even at diagnosis, in the treatment
of diabetes can be beneﬁcial depend-
ing on a person’s or caregiver’s needs
and preferences. C
Technology is
rapidly changing, but
there is no one-size-ﬁts-all approach to
technology use in people with diabetes.
Insurance coverage can lag behind de-
vice availability, people’s interest in de-
vices and willingness for adoption can
vary, and health care teams may have
challenges in keeping up with newly re-
leased technology. An American Diabe-
tes Association resource, which can be
accessed at consumerguide.diabetes.org,
can help health care professionals and
people with diabetes make decisions as
to the initial choice of devices. Other
sources, including health care profes-
sionals and device manufacturers, can
help people troubleshoot when difﬁ-
culties arise (1–10).
Education and Training
In general, no device used in diabetes
management works optimally without
education, training, and ongoing support.
There are multiple resources for online
tutorials and training videos as well as writ-
ten material on the use of devices. People
with diabetes vary in comfort level with
technology, and some prefer in-person
training and support. Those with more
education regarding device use have
better outcomes (1,2); therefore, the
need for additional education should be
periodically assessed, particularly if out-
comes are not being met. Better out-
comes cannot be achieved, however,
without the training and education of
health care professionals. The assessment
of competencies in diabetes technology is
crucial for prescribers, certiﬁed diabetes
and education specialists, pharmacists,
nurses, and anyone involved in the care of
people with diabetes.These competencies
are described as basic, fundamental, inter-
mediate, and advanced and are speciﬁc to
the role of each health care team member
(11). In addition, the health care team’s
knowledge and competency are even
more relevant when people with diabetes
are started on advanced diabetes technol-
ogies, such as AID systems. In such sit-
uations, training is vital and should
include a discussion about realistic ex-
pectations for the ability of the initi-
ated system to achieve glucose goals,
the system’s features and limitations,
and the best way to utilize the new sys-
tem to maximize the beneﬁts it can of-
fer (12).
Use in Schools
Instructions for device use should be
outlined in the student’s diabetes medical
management plan (DMMP). A backup
plan should be included in the DMMP for
potential device failure (e.g., BGM, CGM,
and/or insulin delivery devices). School
nurses and designees should complete
training to stay up to date on diabetes
technologies prescribed for use in the
school setting. Updated resources to
support diabetes care at school, including
training materials and a DMMP template,
can be found online at diabetes.org/
safeatschool.
Initiation of Device Use
The use of CGM devices should be con-
sidered from the outset of the diagnosis
of diabetes that requires insulin manage-
ment (3,4). This allows for close tracking
of glucose levels with adjustments of insu-
lin dosing and lifestyle modiﬁcations and
removes the burden of frequent BGM. In
addition, early CGM initiation after diag-
nosis of type 1 diabetes in youth has
been shown to decrease A1C levels and
is associated with high parental satisfac-
tion and reliance on this technology for
diabetes management (5,6). Training on
alarm/alert settings when initiating CGM
is crucial to avoid alarm overload. In ap-
propriate individuals, early use of AID sys-
tems or insulin pumps may be considered.
Interruption of access to CGM is associ-
ated with a worsening of outcomes
(7,13); therefore, it is important for in-
dividuals on CGM to have consistent
access to devices.
BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING
Recommendations
7.9 People with diabetes should be
provided with blood glucose monitor-
ing (BGM) devices as indicated by
their circumstances, preferences, and
treatment. People using CGM devices
must also have access to BGM at all
times. A
7.10 People who are taking insulin
and using BGM should be encouraged
to check their blood glucose levels
when appropriate based on their insu-
lin therapy. This may include check-
ing when fasting, prior to meals and
snacks, after meals, at bedtime, in
the middle of the night, prior to, dur-
ing, and after exercise, when hypogly-
cemia is suspected, after treating low
blood glucose levels until they are
normoglycemic, when hyperglycemia
is suspected, and prior to and while
performing critical tasks such as driv-
ing. B
7.11 Health care professionals should
be aware of the differences in accu-
racy among blood glucose meters.
Only meters approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
(or comparable regulatory agencies
for other geographical locations) with
proven accuracy should be used, with
unexpired test strips purchased from
a pharmacy or licensed distributor and
properly stored. E
7.12 Although BGM in people on non-
insulin therapies has not consistently
shown clinically signiﬁcant reductions
in A1C levels, it may be helpful when
altering meal plans, physical activity
plans, and/or medications (particularly
medications that can cause hypoglyce-
mia) in conjunction with a treatment
adjustment program. E
7.13 Health care professionals should
be aware of medications and other
factors that can interfere with glucose
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diabetes Technology
S127
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

meter accuracy and provide clinical
management as indicated. E
Major clinical trials of insulin-treated peo-
ple with diabetes have included BGM as
part of multifactorial interventions to dem-
onstrate the beneﬁt of intensive glycemic
management on diabetes complications
(14). BGM is thus an integral component
of effective therapy for individuals using in-
sulin. In recent years, CGM has emerged
as a method for the assessment of glucose
levels (discussed below). Glucose monitor-
ing allows people with diabetes to evalu-
ate their individual responses to therapy
and assess whether glycemic goals are be-
ing safely achieved. Integrating results into
diabetes management can be a useful tool
for guiding medical nutrition therapy and
physical activity, preventing hypoglycemia,
or adjusting medications (particularly pran-
dial insulin doses or correction bolus
doses). The speciﬁc needs and goals of the
person with diabetes should dictate BGM
frequency and timing or the consideration
of CGM use. As recommended by the de-
vice manufacturers and the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), people with
diabetes using CGM must have access
to BGM for multiple reasons, including
whenever there is suspicion that the CGM
is inaccurate, while waiting for warm-up,
when there is a disruption in CGM trans-
mission, for calibration (if needed) or if a
warning message appears, when CGM sup-
plies are delayed, and in any clinical setting
where glucose levels are changing rapidly
(>2 mg/dL/min), which could cause a dis-
crepancy between CGM and blood glucose
values.
Meter Standards
Glucose meters meeting FDA guidance
for meter accuracy provide the most
reliable data for diabetes management.
There are several current standards for
the accuracy of blood glucose meters, but
the two most used are those of the Inter-
national Organization for Standardization
(ISO) (ISO 15197:2013) and the FDA. The
current ISO and FDA standards are com-
pared in Table 7.1. In Europe, currently
marketed meters must meet current ISO
standards. In the U.S., currently mar-
keted meters must meet the standard
under which they were approved, which
may not be the current standard. More-
over, the monitoring of current accuracy
postmarketing is left to the manufac-
turer and not routinely checked by an in-
dependent source.
People with diabetes assume their
glucose meter is accurate because it is
FDA cleared, but that may not be the
case. There is substantial variation in the
accuracy of widely used BGM systems
(15,16). The Diabetes Technology Society
Blood Glucose Monitoring System Surveil-
lance Program provides information on
the performance of devices used for BGM
(diabetestechnology.org/surveillance/). In
one analysis, 6 of the top 18 best-selling
glucose meters met the accuracy stan-
dard (17). In a subsequent analysis with
updated glucose meters, 14 of 18 glucose
meters met the minimum accuracy re-
quirements (18). There are single-meter
studies in which beneﬁts have been
found with individual meter systems,
but few studies have compared meters
head-to-head. Certain meter system char-
acteristics, such as the use of lancing de-
vices that are less painful (19) and the
ability to reapply blood to a strip with an
insufﬁcient initial sample, or meters with
integrated speech that can read aloud
glucose levels for visually impaired indi-
viduals (20), may also be beneﬁcial to
people with diabetes (21) and may make
BGM less burdensome to perform.
Counterfeit Strips
People with diabetes should be advised
against purchasing or reselling preowned
or secondhand test strips, as these may
give incorrect results. Only unopened and
unexpired vials of glucose test strips should
be used to ensure BGM accuracy.
Optimizing Blood Glucose
Monitoring Device Use
Optimal use of BGM devices requires
proper review and interpretation of data
by both the person with diabetes and
the health care professional to ensure
that data are used in an effective and
timely manner. In people with type 1 dia-
betes, there is a correlation between
greater BGM frequency and lower A1C
levels (22). Among those who check their
blood glucose at least once daily, many
report taking no action when results are
high or low (23). Some meters now pro-
vide advice to the user in real time when
monitoring glucose levels (24), whereas
others can be used as a part of inte-
grated health platforms (25). People
with diabetes should be taught how to
use BGM data to adjust food intake,
physical activity, or pharmacologic therapy
to achieve speciﬁc goals. The ongoing
need for and frequency of BGM should
be reevaluated at each routine visit to
ensure its effective use (22,26,27).
People With Diabetes on Intensive Insulin
Therapies
BGM is especially important for people
with diabetes treated with insulin to
monitor for and prevent hypoglycemia
and hyperglycemia. Most individuals on
intensive insulin therapies (multiple daily
injections [MDI] or insulin pump therapy)
should be encouraged to assess glucose
levels using BGM (and/or CGM) prior to
meals and snacks, at bedtime, occasion-
ally postprandially, prior to, during, and
Table 7.1—Comparison of ISO 15197:2013 and FDA BG meter accuracy standards
Setting
FDA (287,299)
ISO 15197:2013 (300)
Hospital use
95% within 12% for BG $75 mg/dL
95% within 12 mg/dL for BG <75 mg/dL
98% within 15% for BG $75 mg/dL
98% within 15 mg/dL for BG <75 mg/dL
95% within 15% for BG $100 mg/dL
95% within 15 mg/dL for BG <100 mg/dL
99% in A or B region of consensus error grid‡
Home use
95% within 15% for all BG in the usable BG range†
99% within 20% for all BG in the usable BG range†
BG, blood glucose; FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; ISO, International Organization for Standardization. To convert mg/dL to mmol/L, see
endmemo.com/medical/unitconvert/Glucose.php. †The range of blood glucose values for which the meter has been proven accurate and will pro-
vide readings (other than low, high, or error). ‡Values outside of the “clinically acceptable” A and B regions are considered “outlier” readings
and may be dangerous to use for therapeutic decisions (301).
S128
Diabetes Technology
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

after physical activity, when they sus-
pect hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia, af-
ter treating hypoglycemia until they are
normoglycemic, and prior to and while
performing critical tasks such as driving. For
many individuals using BGM, this requires
checking up to 6–10 times daily, although in-
dividual needs may vary. A database study
of almost 27,000 children and adolescents
with type 1 diabetes showed that, after ad-
justing for multiple confounders, increased
daily frequency of BGM was signiﬁcantly as-
sociated with lower A1C levels (0.2% per
additional check per day) and with fewer
acute complications (28).
People With Diabetes Using Basal Insulin
and/or Oral Agents and Noninsulin
Injectables
The evidence is insufﬁcient regarding
when to prescribe BGM and how often
monitoring is needed for insulin-treated
people with diabetes who do not use
intensive insulin therapy, such as those
with type 2 diabetes taking basal insulin
with or without oral agents and/or non-
insulin injectables. However, for those
taking basal insulin, assessing fasting
glucose with BGM to inform dose ad-
justments to achieve blood glucose tar-
gets results in lower A1C levels (29,30).
In people with type 2 diabetes not
taking insulin, routine glucose monitor-
ing may be of limited additional clinical
beneﬁt. By itself, even when combined
with education, this practice has shown
limited improvement in outcomes (31–34).
However, for some individuals, glucose
monitoring can provide insight into the
impact of nutrition, physical activity, and
medication management on glucose levels.
Glucose monitoring may also be useful in
assessing hypoglycemia, glucose levels dur-
ing intercurrent illness, or discrepancies be-
tween measured A1C and glucose levels
when there is concern an A1C result may
not be reliable in speciﬁc individuals (for
more details, see Section 2, “Diagnosis and
Classiﬁcation of Diabetes”). It may be use-
ful when coupled with a treatment adjust-
ment program. In a year-long study of
insulin-naive people with diabetes with
suboptimal initial glycemic outcomes, a
group trained in structured BGM (a paper
tool was used at least quarterly to collect
and interpret seven-point BGM proﬁles
taken on three consecutive days) reduced
their A1C levels by 0.3% more than that of
the control group (35). A trial of once-daily
BGM that included enhanced feedback
from people with diabetes through mes-
saging found no clinically or statistically
signiﬁcant change in A1C levels at 1 year
(34). Meta-analyses have suggested that
BGM can reduce A1C levels by 0.25–0.3%
at 6 months (36–38), but the effect was
attenuated at 12 months in one analysis
(36). Reductions in A1C levels were greater
(0.3%) in trials where structured BGM
data were used to adjust medications, but
A1C levels were not changed signiﬁcantly
without such structured diabetes therapy
adjustment (38). A key consideration is
that performing BGM alone does not lower
blood glucose levels.To be useful, the infor-
mation must be integrated into clinical and
self-management treatment plans.
Glucose Meter Inaccuracy
Although many meters function well un-
der various circumstances, health care pro-
fessionals and people with diabetes must
be aware of factors that impair meter ac-
curacy. A meter reading that seems discor-
dant with the clinical picture needs to be
retested or tested in a laboratory. Health
care professionals in intensive care unit
settings need to be particularly aware of
the potential for incorrect meter readings
during critical illness, and laboratory-based
values should be used if there is any doubt.
Some meters give error messages if meter
readings are likely to be false (39).
Oxygen. Currently available glucose moni-
tors use an enzymatic reaction linked to an
electrochemical reaction, either glucose ox-
idase or glucose dehydrogenase (40). Glu-
cose oxidase monitors are sensitive to the
oxygen available and should only be used
with capillary blood in people with normal
oxygen saturation. Higher oxygen tensions
(i.e., arterial blood or oxygen therapy) may
result in false low-glucose readings, and
low oxygen tensions (i.e., high altitude,
hypoxia, or venous blood readings) may
lead to falsely elevated glucose readings.
Glucose dehydrogenase–based monitors
are generally not sensitive to oxygen.
Temperature. Because the reaction is sen-
sitive to temperature, all monitors have an
acceptable temperature range (40). Most
will show an error if the temperature is un-
acceptable, but a few will provide a reading
and a message indicating that the value
may be incorrect. Humidity and altitude
may also alter glucose readings.
Interfering Substances. There are a few
physiologic and pharmacologic factors that
interfere with glucose readings. Most in-
terfere only with glucose oxidase systems
(40).They are listed in Table 7.2.
CONTINUOUS GLUCOSE
MONITORING DEVICES
See Table 7.3 for deﬁnitions of types of
CGM devices.
Recommendations
7.14 Real-time CGM (rtCGM) A or in-
termittently scanned CGM (isCGM) B
should be offered for diabetes man-
agement in adults with diabetes on
multiple daily injections (MDI) or CSII
who are capable of using the devices
safely (either by themselves or with a
caregiver). The choice of device should
be made based on the individual’s cir-
cumstances, preferences, and needs.
7.15 rtCGM A or isCGM B should be
offered for diabetes management in
adults with diabetes on basal insulin
who are capable of using the devices
safely (either by themselves or with a
caregiver). The choice of device should
be made based on the individual’s
circumstances, preferences, and needs.
7.16 rtCGM A or isCGM E should be
offered for diabetes management in
youth with type 1 diabetes on MDI
or CSII who are capable of using the
devices safely (either by themselves
or with a caregiver). The choice of de-
vice should be made based on the in-
dividual’s circumstances, preferences,
and needs.
7.17 rtCGM or isCGM should be offered
for diabetes management in youth with
type 2 diabetes on MDI or CSII who are
capable of using the devices safely (ei-
ther by themselves or with a caregiver).
Table 7.2—Interfering substances for
glucose meter readings
Glucose oxidase monitors
Uric acid
Galactose
Xylose
Acetaminophen
L-DOPA
Ascorbic acid
Glucose dehydrogenase monitors using
pyrroloquinolinequinone cofactor
(GDH/PQQ)
Icodextrin (used in peritoneal dialysis)
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diabetes Technology
S129
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

The choice of device should be made
based on the individual’s circumstances,
preferences, and needs. E
7.18 In people with diabetes on MDI or
CSII, rtCGM devices should be used as
close to daily as possible for maximal
beneﬁt. A isCGM devices should be
scanned frequently, at a minimum once
every 8 h to avoid gaps in data. A
People with diabetes should have un-
interrupted access to their supplies to
minimize gaps in CGM. A
7.19 When used as an adjunct to
preprandial and postprandial BGM,
CGM can help to achieve A1C tar-
gets in diabetes and pregnancy. B
7.20 Periodic use of rtCGM or isCGM
or use of professional CGM can be
helpful for diabetes management in
circumstances where consistent use
of CGM is not desired or available. C
7.21 Skin reactions, either due to irri-
tation or allergy, should be assessed
and addressed to aid in successful use
of devices. E
7.22 People who wear CGM devices
should be educated on potential in-
terfering substances and other fac-
tors that may affect accuracy. C
CGM measures interstitial glucose (which
correlates well with plasma glucose, al-
though at times, it can lag if glucose levels
are rising or falling rapidly). There are two
basic types of CGM devices. The ﬁrst type
includes those that are owned by the
user, unblinded, and intended for frequent
or continuous use, including real-time
CGM (rtCGM) and intermittently scanned
CGM (isCGM). The second type is profes-
sional CGM devices that are owned by
practices and applied in the clinic, which
provide data that are blinded or un-
blinded for a discrete period of time. The
types of sensors currently available are
either disposable (rtCGM and isCGM) or
implantable (rtCGM). Table 7.3 provides
the deﬁnitions for the types of CGM de-
vices. For people with type 1 diabetes
using CGM, frequency of sensor use is
an important predictor of A1C lowering
for all age-groups (41,42). The frequency
of scanning with isCGM devices is also
correlated with improved outcomes
(43–46).
Some real-time systems require calibra-
tion by the user, which varies in frequency
depending on the device. Additionally,
some CGM systems are called adjunctive,
meaning the user should perform BGM
for making treatment decisions such as
dosing insulin or treating hypoglycemia.
Devices that do not have this require-
ment outside of certain clinical situations
(see BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING, above) are
called nonadjunctive (47–49).
One speciﬁc isCGM device (Freestyle
Libre 2 [no generic form available]) and
three speciﬁc rtCGM devices (Dexcom
G6 [no generic form available], Dexcom
G7 [no generic form available], and Free-
Style Libre 3 [no generic form available])
have been designated integrated CGM
(iCGM) devices (50). This is a higher stan-
dard set by the FDA so that these devices
can be integrated with other digitally con-
nected devices. Dexcom G6 rtCGM, Dex-
com G7 rtCGM, and a modiﬁed version
of Libre 2 and Libre 3 are FDA approved
for use with AID systems. At this time, Dex-
com G6 is integrated with four AID systems
(t:slim ×2 with control IQ, Omnipod 5, iLet,
and Mobi). Similarly, the Medtronic Guard-
ian 3 rtCGM (no generic available) and the
Medtronic Guardian 4 rtCGM are FDA ap-
proved for use with the 670/770G and
780G AID systems, respectively.
Benefits of Continuous Glucose
Monitoring
Data From Randomized Controlled Trials
Multiple randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
have been performed using rtCGM devices,
and the results have largely been positive
in terms of reducing A1C levels and/or
episodes of hypoglycemia, as long as
participants regularly wore the devices
(41,42,51–73). The initial studies were
done primarily in adults and youth with
type 1 diabetes on insulin pump therapy
and/or MDI (41,42,51–54,57–67). The pri-
mary outcome was met and showed ben-
eﬁt in adults of all ages (41,51,52,57,
58,60,62,63,74–77), including seniors (59,
78,79). Data in children show that rtCGM
use in young children with type 1 diabe-
tes reduced hypoglycemia; in addition,
behavioral support of parents of young
children with diabetes using rtCGM
showed the beneﬁts of reducing hypo-
glycemia concerns and diabetes dis-
tress (41,66,80). Similarly, A1C level
reduction was seen in adolescents and
young adults with type 1 diabetes using
rtCGM (65). RCT data on rtCGM use in
individuals with type 2 diabetes on MDI
(69), mixed therapies (70,71), and basal
insulin (72,81) have consistently shown
reductions in A1C levels and increases
in time in range (TIR) (70–180 mg/dL
[3.9–10 mmol/L]) but not a reduction in
rates of hypoglycemia. The improve-
ments in type 2 diabetes have largely
occurred without changes in insulin
doses or other diabetes medications.
CGM discontinuation in individuals with
type 2 diabetes on basal insulin caused
partial reversal of A1C reduction and TIR
improvements, suggesting that continued
CGM use achieves the greatest beneﬁts
(13). In addition, rtCGM beneﬁts were re-
ported in a mixed population (including
people not using insulin) of adults with
Table 7.3—Continuous glucose monitoring devices
Type of CGM
Description
rtCGM
CGM systems that measure and display glucose levels continuously
isCGM with and without alarms
CGM systems that measure glucose levels continuously but require scanning for visualization and
storage of glucose values
Professional CGM
CGM devices that are placed on the person with diabetes in the health care professional’s ofﬁce and
worn for a discrete period of time (generally 7–14 days). Data may be blinded or visible to the
person wearing the device. The data are used to assess glycemic patterns and trends. Unlike rtCGM
and isCGM devices, these devices are clinic-based and not owned by the person with diabetes.
CGM, continuous glucose monitoring; isCGM, intermittently scanned CGM; rtCGM, real-time CGM.
S130
Diabetes Technology
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

type 2 diabetes with reduction in A1C
levels, increase in TIR, and reduction
of time in hyperglycemia (>180 mg/dL
[>10 mmol/L] and >250 mg/dL [>13.8
mmol/L]) (10).
RCT data for isCGM are fewer but in-
creasing. One study was performed in
adults with type 1 diabetes and met its
primary outcome of a reduction in rates
of hypoglycemia (55). In adults with
type 2 diabetes using insulin, two stud-
ies were done: one study did not meet
its primary end point of A1C levels reduc-
tion (82) but achieved a secondary end
point of a reduction in hypoglycemia, and
the other study met its primary end point
of an improvement in the Diabetes Treat-
ment Satisfaction Questionnaire score as
well as a secondary end point of A1C
level reduction (83). In a study of individ-
uals with type 1 or type 2 diabetes taking
insulin, the primary outcome of a reduc-
tion in severe hypoglycemia was not met
and the incidence of severe hypoglycemia
was not signiﬁcantly different between
isCGM users and the BGM group (84).
One study in youth with type 1 diabetes
did not show a reduction in A1C levels
(85); however, the device was well re-
ceived and was associated with an in-
creased frequency of testing and improved
diabetes treatment satisfaction (85). A ran-
domized trial of adults with type 1 diabe-
tes showed that the use of isCGM with
optional alerts and alarms resulted in re-
duction of A1C levels compared with BGM
use (9). The beneﬁts of isCGM for adults
with type 2 diabetes not using insulin were
recently reported in an RCT. In this study,
the use of isCGM plus diabetes education
versus diabetes education alone showed
decreased A1C levels and increased TIR as
well as increased time in tight target range
(70–140 mg/dL [3.9–7.8 mmol/L]) in the
isCGM-plus-education group (8).
Observational and Real-world Studies
isCGM has been widely available in many
countries for people with diabetes, and
this allows for the collection of large
amounts of data across groups of people
with diabetes. In adults with diabetes,
these data include results from observa-
tional studies, retrospective studies, and
analyses of registry and population data
(86,87). In individuals with type 1 diabetes
wearing isCGM devices, most (46,86,88),
but not all (89), studies have shown im-
provement in A1C levels. Reductions in
acute diabetes complications, such as
diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), episodes of
severe hypoglycemia or diabetes-related
coma, and hospitalizations for hypogly-
cemia and hyperglycemia, have been ob-
served (46,89,90), with persistent effects
observed even after 2 years of CGM initi-
ation (91). Some retrospective/observa-
tional data have shown an improvement
in A1C levels for adults with type 2 diabetes
on MDI (92), basal insulin (93), and basal
insulin or noninsulin therapies (94). In a
retrospective study of adults with type 2
diabetes taking insulin, a reduction in
acute diabetes-related events and all-
cause hospitalizations was seen (95). Re-
sults of self-reported outcomes varied,
but where measured, people with diabe-
tes had an increase in treatment satisfac-
tion with isCGM compared with BGM.
In an observational study in youth
with type 1 diabetes, a slight increase in
A1C levels and weight was seen, but
the device was associated with a high
user satisfaction rate (87).
Retrospective data from rtCGM use in
a Veterans Affairs population (96) with
type 1 and type 2 diabetes treated with
insulin showed that the use of rtCGM sig-
niﬁcantly lowered A1C levels and re-
duced rates of emergency department
visits or hospitalizations for hypoglycemia
but did not signiﬁcantly lower overall
rates of emergency department visits,
hospitalizations, or hyperglycemia.
Real-time Continuous Glucose Monitoring
Compared With Intermittently Scanned
Continuous Glucose Monitoring
In adults with type 1 diabetes, three RCTs
have been conducted comparing isCGM
and rtCGM (97–99). In two of the stud-
ies, the primary outcome was a reduction
in time spent in hypoglycemia, and rtCGM
showed greater beneﬁts compared with
isCGM (97,98). In the other study, the pri-
mary outcome was improved TIR, and
rtCGM also showed greater beneﬁts com-
pared with isCGM (99). A retrospective
analysis also showed improvement in TIR
with rtCGM compared with isCGM (100).
A more recent 12-month real-world non-
randomized study compared rtCGM with
isCGM in adults with type 1 diabetes. At
12 months, A1C levels, time in level 1 hypo-
glycemia (<70 mg/dL [<3.9 mmol/L]), and
time in level 2 hypoglycemia (<54 mg/dL
[<3.0 mmol/L]) were all lower in the rtCGM
group than in the isCGM group; similarly,
the TIR was higher in the rtCGM group than
in the isCGM group (101).
Data Analysis
The abundance of data provided by
CGM offers opportunities to analyze data
for people with diabetes more granu-
larly than previously possible, provid-
ing additional information to aid in
achieving glycemic goals. A variety of
metrics have been proposed (102) and
are discussed in Section 6, “Glycemic
Goals and Hypoglycemia.” CGM is es-
sential for creating an ambulatory glu-
cose proﬁle and providing data on TIR,
percentage of time spent above and
below range, and glycemic variability
(103). Data analysis can be burdensome
without a systematic approach to its re-
view. Several efforts have been made to
streamline the interpretation of CGM
reports to assist health care professio-
nals in their daily practice. These have
various, but overall similar, approaches.
The initial steps are focused on assessing
the sufﬁciency and quality of data; subse-
quent recommendations include review-
ing the presence and trends or patterns
of hypoglycemia, followed by hyper-
glycemia patterns and trends. Some
authors also suggest approaches to
changing therapy plans based on the
data reviewed that enable health care
professionals to make a simple yet
comprehensive review and plan of
care even within the time constraints
of ofﬁce visits (104–108).
Real-time Continuous Glucose Monitoring
Device Use in Pregnancy
Recently, CGM indication has been ex-
panded to include pregnancy for Dexcom
G7, FreeStyle Libre 2, and FreeStyle Libre 3,
which will enhance care in this population
(109,110). Prior data from one well-
designed RCTshowed a reduction in A1C lev-
els in pregnant adults with type 1 diabetes
on MDI or insulin pump therapy and using
rtCGM in addition to standard care; CGM
users experienced more pregnancy-speciﬁc
TIR (63–140 mg/dL [3.5–7.8 mmol/L]) and
less time in hyperglycemia (111). This
study demonstrated the value of rtCGM
in pregnancy complicated by type 1 dia-
betes by showing a mild improvement in
A1C levels and a signiﬁcant improvement
in the maternal glucose TIR for pregnancy
(63–140 mg/dL [3.5–7.8 mmol/L]), with-
out an increase in hypoglycemia, as well
as reductions in large-for-gestational-age
births, infant hospital length of stay, and
severe neonatal hypoglycemia (111). An
observational cohort study that evaluated
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diabetes Technology
S131
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

the glycemic variables reported using rtCGM
and isCGM found that lower mean glucose,
lower standard deviation, and a higher per-
centage of TIR were associated with lower
risks of large-for-gestational-age births and
other adverse neonatal outcomes (112).
Data from one study suggested that the
use of rtCGM-reported mean glucose is su-
perior to use of the glucose management
indicator and other calculations to estimate
A1C levels given the changes to A1C levels
that occur in pregnancy (113). Two studies
employing intermittent use of rtCGM
showed no difference in neonatal out-
comes in individuals with type 1 diabetes
(114) or gestational diabetes mellitus (115).
At this time, data are insufﬁcient for recom-
mending the use of CGM in all pregnant
people with type 2 diabetes or GDM
(116,117). The decision of whether to
use CGM in pregnant individuals with
type 2 diabetes or GDM should be individ-
ualized based on treatment plan, circum-
stances, preferences, and needs. Although
CGM systems for use in pregnancy do not
require calibrations and are approved for
nonadjunctive use, when using CGM in
diabetes and pregnancy, determination of
glucose levels by ﬁnger stick may be neces-
sary in certain circumstances, such as in
the setting of hypoglycemia or hypergly-
cemia outside the recommended CGM
targets (63–140 mg/dL [3.5–7.8 mmol/L])
during pregnancy.
Use of Professional and Intermittent
Continuous Glucose Monitoring
Professional CGM devices, which provide
retrospective data, either blinded or un-
blinded, for analysis can be used to identify
patterns of hypoglycemia and hyperglyce-
mia (118,119). Professional CGM can be
helpful to evaluate an individual’s glucose
levels when either rtCGM or isCGM is
not available to the individual or they
prefer a blinded analysis or a shorter ex-
perience with unblinded data. It can be
particularly useful in individuals using
agents that can cause hypoglycemia, as
the data can be used to evaluate peri-
ods of hypoglycemia and make medica-
tion dose adjustments if needed. It can
also be useful to evaluate periods of
hyperglycemia.
Some data have shown the beneﬁt of in-
termittent use of CGM (rtCGM or isCGM) in
individuals with type 2 diabetes on noninsu-
lin and/or basal insulin therapies (70,120).
In these RCTs, people with type 2 diabetes
not on intensive insulin therapy used CGM
intermittently compared with those ran-
domized to BGM. Both early (70) and late
improvements in A1C levels were found
(70,120). Use of professional or intermittent
CGM should always be coupled with analy-
sis and interpretation for people with dia-
betes, along with education as needed to
adjust medication and change lifestyle be-
haviors (121–123).
Side Effects of Continuous Glucose
Monitoring Devices
Contact dermatitis (both irritant and al-
lergic) has been reported with all devices
that attach to the skin (18,124,125). In
some cases, this has been linked to the
presence of isobornyl acrylate, a skin
sensitizer that can cause an additional
spreading allergic reaction (126–128). It is
important to ask CGM users periodically
about adhesive reactions, as tape formu-
lations may change over time. Patch test-
ing can sometimes identify the cause of
contact dermatitis (129). Identifying and
eliminating tape allergens is important to
ensure the comfortable use of devices
and promote self-care (130–133).The Pan-
ther Program offers resources in English
and Spanish at pantherprogram.org/skin
-solutions. In some instances, using an im-
planted sensor can help avoid skin reac-
tions in those sensitive to tape (134,135).
Substances and Factors Affecting
Continuous Glucose Monitoring Accuracy
Sensor interference due to several med-
ications/substances is a known potential
source of CGM sensor measurement errors
(Table 7.4).While several of these substan-
ces have been reported in the various
CGM brands’ user manuals, additional in-
terferences have been discovered after the
market release of these products. Hydroxy-
urea, used for myeloproliferative disorders
and hematologic conditions, is one of the
most recently identiﬁed interfering sub-
stances that cause a temporary increase in
sensor glucose values discrepant from ac-
tual glucose values (136–141). Similarly,
substances such as mannitol and sorbitol,
when administered intravenously or as a
component of peritoneal dialysis solution,
may increase blood mannitol or sorbitol
concentrations and cause falsely elevated
readings of sensor glucose (142).Therefore,
it is crucial to routinely review the medica-
tions and supplements used by the person
with diabetes to identify possible interfer-
ing substances and advise them accord-
ingly on the need to use additional BGM if
sensor values are unreliable due to these
substances.
INSULIN DELIVERY
Insulin Syringes and Pens
Recommendations
7.23 For people with insulin-requiring
diabetes on MDI, insulin pens are pre-
ferred in most cases. Still, insulin syringes
may be used for insulin delivery consider-
ing individual and caregiver preference,
insulin type, availability in vials, dosing
Table 7.4—Continuous glucose monitoring devices interfering substances
Medication
Systems affected
Effect
Acetaminophen
>4 g/day
Dexcom G6, Dexcom G7
Higher sensor readings than actual glucose
Any dose
Medtronic Guardian
Higher sensor readings than actual glucose
Ascorbic acid (vitamin C), >500 mg/day
FreeStyle Libre 14 day, FreeStyle Libre 2,
FreeStyle Libre 3
Higher sensor readings than actual glucose
Hydroxyurea
Dexcom G6, Dexcom G7, Medtronic Guardian
Higher sensor readings than actual glucose
Mannitol (intravenously or as peritoneal
dialysis solution)
Senseonics Eversense
Higher sensor readings than actual glucose
Sorbitol (intravenously or as peritoneal
dialysis solution)
Senseonics Eversense
Higher sensor readings than actual glucose
S132
Diabetes Technology
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

therapy, cost, and self-management ca-
pabilities. C
7.24 Insulin pens or insulin injection
aids are recommended for people with
dexterity issues or vision impairment or
when decided by shared decision-
making to facilitate the accurate dos-
ing and administration of insulin. C
7.25 Connected insulin pens can be
helpful for diabetes management and
may be used in people with diabetes
taking subcutaneous insulin. E
7.26 FDA-approved insulin dose calcu-
lators/decision support systems may be
helpful for calculating insulin doses. C
Injecting insulin with a syringe or pen
(143–159) is the insulin delivery method
used by most people with diabetes
(149,160), although inhaled insulin is also
available. Others use insulin pumps or
AID devices (see INSULIN PUMPS AND AUTO-
MATED INSULIN DELIVERY SYSTEMS, below). For
people with diabetes who use insulin, in-
sulin syringes and pens are both able to
deliver insulin safely and effectively for
the achievement of glycemic targets. In-
dividual preferences, cost, insulin type,
dosing therapy, and self-management
capabilities should be considered when
choosing among delivery systems. Trials
with insulin pens generally show equiva-
lence or small improvements in glycemic
outcomes compared with using a vial
and syringe. Many individuals with dia-
betes prefer using a pen because of its
simplicity and convenience. It is impor-
tant to note that while many insulin
types are available for purchase as ei-
ther pens or vials, others may be avail-
able in only one form or the other, and
there may be signiﬁcant cost differences
between pens and vials (see Table 9.4
for a list of insulin product costs with
dosage forms). Insulin pens may allow
people with vision impairment or dex-
terity issues to dose insulin accurately
(161–163), and insulin injection aids are
also available to help with these issues.
(For a helpful list of injection aids, see
consumerguide.diabetes.org/collections/
injection-aids). Inhaled insulin can be
useful in people who have an aversion
to injection.
The most common syringe sizes are
1 mL, 0.5 mL, and 0.3 mL, allowing doses
of up to 100 units, 50 units, and 30 units,
respectively, of U-100 insulin. Some 0.3-mL
syringes have half-unit markings, whereas
other syringes have 1- to 2-unit increment
markings. In a few parts of the world, insu-
lin syringes still have U-80 and U-40 mark-
ings for older insulin concentrations and
veterinary insulin, and U-500 syringes are
available for the use of U-500 insulin. Syrin-
ges are generally used once but may be
reused by the same individual in resource-
limited settings with appropriate storage
and cleansing (163).
Insulin pens offer added convenience by
combining the vial and syringe into a single
device. Insulin pens, allowing push-button
injections, come as disposable pens with
preﬁlled cartridges or reusable insulin pens
with replaceable insulin cartridges. Pens
vary with respect to dosing increment and
minimal dose, ranging from half-unit doses
to 2-unit dose increments, with the latter
available in U-200 insulin pens. U-500 pens
come in 5-unit dose increments. Some re-
usable pens include a memory function,
which can recall dose amounts and timing.
Connected insulin pens are insulin pens
with the capacity to record and/or transmit
insulin dose data. Insulin pen caps are also
available and are placed on existing insulin
pens and may assist with calculating insulin
doses and by providing a memory function.
Some connected insulin pens and pen caps
can be programmed to calculate insulin
doses, can be synced with select CGM sys-
tems, and can provide downloadable data
reports. These pens and pen caps are use-
ful to people with diabetes for real-time
insulin dosing and allow clinicians to retro-
spectively review the insulin delivery times
and in some cases doses and glucose data
in order to make informed insulin dose
adjustments (164). A quantitative study
showed that people with diabetes pre-
ferred connected pens because of their
ability to log insulin doses and glucose lev-
els automatically (164).
Needle thickness (gauge) and length are
other considerations. Needle gauges range
from 22 to 34, with a higher gauge indicat-
ing a thinner needle. A thicker needle can
give a dose of insulin more quickly, while a
thinner needle may cause less pain. Nee-
dle length ranges from 4 to 12.7 mm, with
some evidence suggesting that shorter
needles (4–5 mm) lower the risk of intra-
muscular injection with erratic absorption
and possibly the development of lipohy-
pertrophy. When reused, needles may be
duller and thus injections may be more
painful. Proper insulin injection technique
is a requisite for receiving the full dose of
insulin with each injection. Concerns with
technique and use of the proper technique
are outlined in Section 9, “Pharmacologic
Approaches to Glycemic Treatment.”
Bolus calculators have been developed
to aid dosing decisions (165–170). These
systems are subject to FDA approval to
ensure safety and efﬁcacy in terms of al-
gorithms used and subsequent dosing
recommendations. People interested in
using these systems should be encour-
aged to use those that are FDA approved.
Health care professional input and edu-
cation can be helpful for setting the initial
dosing calculations with ongoing follow-
up for adjustments as needed.
Insulin Pumps and Automated
Insulin Delivery Systems
Recommendations
7.27 AID systems should be offered for
diabetes management to youth and
adults with type 1 diabetes A and other
types of insulin-deﬁcient diabetes E
who are capable of using the device
safely (either by themselves or with a
caregiver). The choice of device should
be made based on the individual’s cir-
cumstances, preferences, and needs. A
7.28 Insulin pump therapy alone with
or without a sensor-augmented pump
low-glucose suspend feature should
be offered for diabetes management
to youth and adults on MDI with
type 1 diabetes A or other types of
insulin-deﬁcient diabetes E who are
capable of using the device safely (ei-
ther by themselves or with a care-
giver) and are not able to use or do
not choose an AID system. The choice
of device should be made based on
the individual’s circumstances, prefer-
ences, and needs. A
7.29 Insulin pump therapy can be
offered for diabetes management to
youth and adults on MDI with type 2
diabetes who are capable of using
the device safely (either by them-
selves or with a caregiver).The choice
of device should be made based on
the individual’s circumstances, prefer-
ences, and needs. A
7.30 Individuals with diabetes who
have been using CSII should have
continued access across third-party
payers. E
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diabetes Technology
S133
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Insulin Pumps
Insulin pumps have been available in the
U.S. for over 40 years. These devices de-
liver rapid-acting insulin throughout the
day to help manage glucose levels. Most
insulin pumps use tubing to deliver insu-
lin through a cannula, while a few attach
directly to the skin without tubing. AID
systems, which can adjust insulin delivery
rates based on sensor glucose values, are
preferred over nonautomated pumps and
MDI in people with type 1 diabetes.
Most studies that compare MDI with
insulin pump therapy have been rela-
tively small and of short duration. How-
ever, a systematic review and meta-
analysis concluded that pump therapy
has modest advantages for lowering A1C
levels (0.30% [95% CI 0.58 to 0.02])
and for reducing severe hypoglycemia
rates in children and adults (171). Real-
world data on insulin pump use in individ-
uals with type 1 diabetes show beneﬁts in
A1C levels and hypoglycemia reductions as
well as total daily insulin dose reduction
(172). There is no consensus to guide
choosing which form of insulin adminis-
tration is best for a given individual, and
research to guide this decision-making
process is needed (171). Thus, the choice
of MDI or an insulin pump is often based
upon the characteristics of the person
with diabetes and which method is most
likely to beneﬁt them. DiabetesWise
(diabeteswise.org/) and DiabetesWise
Pro (pro.diabeteswise.org/), for health
care professionals, and the PANTHER
Program
(pantherprogram.org/device
-comparison-chart) have helpful web-
sites to assist health care professionals and
people with diabetes in choosing diabetes
devices based on their individual needs and
the features of the devices. Newer systems,
such as sensor-augmented pumps and AID
systems, are discussed below.
Adoption of pump therapy in the U.S.
shows geographical variations, which
may be related to health care profes-
sional preference or center characteris-
tics (173,174) and socioeconomic status,
as pump therapy is more common in in-
dividuals of higher socioeconomic status,
as reﬂected by private health insurance,
family income, and education (173,174).
Given the additional barriers to optimal
diabetes care observed in disadvantaged
groups (175), addressing the differences
in access to insulin pumps and other
diabetes technologies may contribute to
fewer health disparities.
Pump therapy can be successfully started
at the time of diagnosis (176,177). Practical
aspects of pump therapy initiation include
assessment of readiness of the person with
diabetes and their family, if applicable (al-
though there is no consensus on which
factors to consider in adults [178] or chil-
dren and adolescents with diabetes), se-
lection of pump type and initial pump
settings, individual/family education on
potential pump complications (e.g., DKA
with infusion set failure), transition from
MDI, and introduction of advanced pump
settings (e.g., temporary basal rates and
extended/square/dual-wave bolus).
Older individuals with type 1 diabetes
beneﬁt from ongoing insulin pump ther-
apy. There are no data to suggest that
measurement of C-peptide levels or anti-
bodies predicts success with insulin pump
therapy (179,180). Additionally, the fre-
quency of follow-up does not inﬂuence
outcomes. Access to insulin pump ther-
apy, including AID systems, should be al-
lowed or continued in older adults as it is
in younger people.
Complications of the pump can be
caused by issues with infusion sets (dis-
lodgement and occlusion), which place in-
dividuals at risk for ketosis and DKA and
thus must be recognized and managed
early (181). Other pump skin issues include
lipohypertrophy or, less frequently, lipoa-
trophy (182,183) and pump site infection
(184). Discontinuation of pump therapy is
relatively uncommon today; the frequency
has decreased over the past few decades,
and its causes have changed (184,185).
Current reasons for attrition are problems
with cost or wearability, loss of insurance,
dislike for the pump, suboptimal glycemic
outcomes, or mood disorders (e.g., anxiety
or depression) (186).
Insulin Pumps in Youth
The safety of insulin pumps in youth
has been established for over 15 years
(187). Studying the effectiveness of in-
sulin pump therapy in lowering A1C lev-
els has been challenging because of the
potential selection bias of observational
studies. Participants on insulin pump
therapy may have a higher socioeco-
nomic status that may facilitate better
glycemic outcomes (188) versus MDI. In
addition, the fast pace of development
of new insulins and technologies quickly
renders comparisons obsolete. However,
RCTs that compared insulin pumps and
MDI with rapid-acting insulin analogs
demonstrated a modest improvement
in A1C levels in participants on insulin
pump therapy (189,190). Observational
studies, registry data, and meta-analyses
have also suggested an improvement in
glycemic outcomes in participants on in-
sulin pump therapy (191–193). Data sug-
gest that insulin pumps reduce the rates
of severe hypoglycemia compared with
MDI (193–196).
There is also evidence that insulin
pump therapy may reduce DKA risk
(193,197) and diabetes complications,
particularly retinopathy and peripheral
neuropathy in youth, compared with MDI
(178). In addition, treatment satisfaction
and quality-of-life measures improved on
insulin pump therapy compared with MDI
(198,199). Therefore, insulin pumps can
be used safely and effectively in youth
with type 1 diabetes to assist with achiev-
ing targeted glycemic outcomes while re-
ducing the risk of hypoglycemia and DKA,
improving quality of life, and preventing
long-term complications. Based on shared
decision-making by people with diabetes
and health care professionals, insulin
pumps may be considered in all chil-
dren and adolescents with type 1 diabe-
tes. In particular, pump therapy may be
the preferred mode of insulin delivery
for children under 7 years of age (200).
Because of a paucity of data in adoles-
cents and youth with type 2 diabetes,
there is insufﬁcient evidence to make
recommendations.
Common barriers to pump therapy
adoption in children and adolescents are
concerns regarding the physical interfer-
ence of the device, discomfort with the
idea of having a device on the body,
therapeutic effectiveness, and ﬁnancial
burden (191,201).
Sensor-Augmented Pumps
Sensor-augmented pumps (or partial closed-
loop systems) consist of three compo-
nents: an insulin pump, a CGM system,
and an algorithm that automates insulin
suspension when glucose is low or is pre-
dicted to go low within the next 30 min,
and these systems have been approved
by the FDA. The Automation to Simulate
Pancreatic Insulin Response (ASPIRE) trial
of 247 people with type 1 diabetes
showed that sensor-augmented insulin
pump therapy with a low-glucose suspend
function signiﬁcantly reduced nocturnal
S134
Diabetes Technology
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

hypoglycemia over 3 months without in-
creasing A1C levels (61). In a different
sensor-augmented pump, predictive low-
glucose suspend reduced time spent with
glucose <70 mg/dL from 3.6% at baseline
to 2.6% (3.2% with sensor-augmented
pump therapy without predictive low-
glucose suspend) without rebound hy-
perglycemia during a 6-week random-
ized crossover trial (202). These devices
may offer the opportunity to reduce hy-
poglycemia for those with a history of
nocturnal hypoglycemia. Additional stud-
ies have been performed in adults and
children that show the beneﬁts of this
technology (203–205).
Automated Insulin Delivery Systems
AID systems increase and decrease insu-
lin delivery based on sensor-derived glu-
cose levels to mimic physiologic insulin
delivery. These systems consist of three
components: an insulin pump, a CGM
system, and an algorithm that determines
insulin delivery. All AID systems on the
market today adjust basal delivery in real
time, and some deliver correction doses
automatically. While insulin delivery in
closed-loop systems eventually may be
truly automated, currently used AID sys-
tems require the manual entry of carbo-
hydrates consumed or qualitative meal
estimation announcements to calculate
prandial doses, and adjustments for phys-
ical activity must be announced in most
systems. Multiple studies using various
systems with varying algorithms, pumps,
and sensors have been performed in
adults and children (206–218). Evidence
suggests AID systems reduce A1C levels
and improve TIR (219–231). They may
also lower the risk of exercise-related
hypoglycemia (231) and may have psy-
chosocial beneﬁts (232–236). The use of
AID systems depends on the preference
of the person with diabetes and the se-
lection of individuals (and/or caregivers)
who are capable of safely and effectively
using the devices.
The data from real-world studies on
AID systems have substantiated the re-
sults observed in RCTs and have con-
ﬁrmed the clinical beneﬁts of AID systems
in people with type 1 diabetes. Beneﬁts
include improvement in A1C levels, TIR,
and other glucometrics as well as psycho-
social beneﬁts (237–242).
Finally, real-world data showed that
AID systems provide the same glycemic
beneﬁts
to
Medicare
and
Medicaid
beneﬁciaries with type 1 and type 2 dia-
betes, emphasizing that access to this
technology should be made available re-
gardless of A1C levels and should be based
on the individual’s needs (243).
Automated Insulin Delivery Systems
in Pregnancy
The use of AID systems in diabetes
and pregnancy presents particular chal-
lenges, as none of the current FDA-
approved systems have glucose goals
that are pregnancy speciﬁc or algorithms
designed to achieve pregnancy-speciﬁc
glucose goals. Initiating or continuing AID
systems during pregnancy needs to be as-
sessed carefully. Selected individuals with
type 1 diabetes should be evaluated as
potential candidates for AID systems in
the setting of expert guidance. Moreover,
if the decision is made to use these sys-
tems in selected pregnant individuals, then
using assistive techniques, such as the
combination of sensor-augmented pump
mode and hybrid closed-loop mode at dif-
ferent time points in pregnancy or through-
out the day, should be considered and
applied as needed to achieve intended
goals (244). See Section 15, “Diabetes and
Pregnancy,” for more details.
Insulin Pumps in People With Type 2 and
Other Types of Diabetes
Traditional insulin pumps can be consid-
ered for the treatment of people with
type 2 diabetes who are on MDI as well
as those who have other types of diabe-
tes resulting in insulin deﬁciency, for
instance, those who have had a pancre-
atectomy and/or individuals with cystic
ﬁbrosis (245–249). Similar to data on in-
sulin pump use in people with type 1 dia-
betes, reductions in A1C levels have been
reported in some studies (247,250). More
recently, real-world reports have shown
reduction of A1C levels and reduction of
total daily insulin dose in individuals with
type 2 diabetes initiating insulin pump
therapy (251). Use of insulin pumps in in-
sulin-requiring people with any type of di-
abetes may improve user satisfaction and
simplify therapy (180,245).
For people with diabetes judged to be
clinically insulin deﬁcient who are treated
with an intensive insulin therapy, the
presence or absence of measurable
C-peptide levels does not correlate
with response to therapy (180). A low
C-peptide value should not be required
for insulin pump coverage in individu-
als with type 2 diabetes.
The use of insulin pumps and AID sys-
tems in type 2 diabetes is still limited;
however, real-world studies have shown
beneﬁts of these technologies in these
individuals (243,252).
Alternative insulin delivery options in
people with type 2 diabetes may include
disposable patch-like devices, which pro-
vide either a CSII of rapid-acting insulin
(basal) with bolus insulin in 2-unit incre-
ments at the press of a button or bolus in-
sulin only delivered in 2-unit increments
used in conjunction with basal insulin in-
jections (246,248,253,254). Use of an in-
sulin pump as a means of insulin delivery
is an individual choice for people with dia-
betes and should be considered an option
in those who are capable of safely using
the device.
Do-It-Yourself Closed-Loop Systems
Recommendation
7.31 Individuals with diabetes may be
using systems not approved by the
FDA, such as do-it-yourself closed-loop
systems and others; health care pro-
fessionals cannot prescribe these sys-
tems but should assist in diabetes
management to ensure the safety of
people with diabetes. E
Some people with type 1 diabetes have
been using do-it-yourself systems that
combine an insulin pump and an rtCGM
with a controller and an algorithm de-
signed to automate insulin delivery
(255–259). Data are emerging on the
safety and effectiveness of speciﬁc sys-
tems (260,261). However, these sys-
tems are not approved by the FDA,
although efforts are underway to ob-
tain regulatory approval for some of
them. The information on how to set
up and manage these systems is freely
available on the internet, and there are
internet groups where people inform
each other as to how to set up and use
them. Although health care professio-
nals cannot prescribe these systems, it
is crucial to keep people with diabetes
safe if they are using these methods
for AID. Part of this entails ensuring
people have a backup plan in case of
pump failure. Additionally, in most do-
it-yourself systems, insulin doses are
adjusted based on the pump settings
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diabetes Technology
S135
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

for basal rates, carbohydrate ratios,
correction doses, and insulin activity.
Therefore, these settings can be evalu-
ated and modiﬁed based on the indi-
vidual’s insulin requirements.
Digital Health Technology
Recommendation
7.32 Systems that combine technol-
ogy and online coaching can be ben-
eﬁcial in managing prediabetes and
diabetes for some individuals. B
Increasingly, people are turning to the in-
ternet for advice, coaching, connection,
and health care. Diabetes, partly because it
is both common and numeric, lends itself
to the development of apps and online
programs. Recommendations for develop-
ing and implementing a digital diabetes
clinic have been published (262). The FDA
approves and monitors clinically validated,
digital, and usually online health technol-
ogies intended to treat a medical or psy-
chological condition; these are known as
digital therapeutics or “digiceuticals” (fda
.gov/medical-devices/digital-health-center-
excellence/device-software-functions-
including-mobile-medical-applications) (263).
Other applications, such as those that as-
sist in displaying or storing data, encour-
age a healthy lifestyle or provide limited
clinical data support.Therefore, it is possi-
ble to ﬁnd apps that have been fully re-
viewed and approved by the FDA and
others designed and promoted by people
with relatively little skill or knowledge in
the clinical treatment of diabetes. There
are insufﬁcient data to provide recom-
mendations for speciﬁc apps for diabetes
management, education, and support in
the absence of RCTs and validation of
apps unless they are FDA cleared.
An area of particular importance is
that of online privacy and security. Es-
tablished cloud-based data aggregator
programs, such as Tidepool, Glooko, and
others, have been developed with ap-
propriate data security features and are
compliant with the U.S. Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996.
These programs can help monitor people
with diabetes and provide access to their
health care teams (264). Consumers
should read the policy regarding data pri-
vacy and sharing before entering data into
an application and learn how they can con-
trol the way their data will be used (some
programs offer the ability to share more or
less information, such as being part of a
registry or data repository or not).
Many online programs offer lifestyle
counseling to achieve weight loss and in-
creased physical activity (265). Many in-
clude a health coach and can create small
groups of similar participants on social net-
works. Some programs aim to treat predia-
betes and prevent progression to diabetes,
often following the model of the Diabetes
Prevention Program (266,267). Others as-
sist in improving diabetes outcomes by
remotely monitoring clinical data (for
instance, wireless monitoring of glucose
levels, weight, or blood pressure) and pro-
viding feedback and coaching (268–273).
There are text messaging approaches that
tie into a variety of different types of life-
style and treatment programs, which vary
in terms of their effectiveness (274,275).
There are limited RCT data for many of
these interventions, and long-term follow-
up is lacking. However, for an individual
with diabetes, opting into one of these pro-
grams can be helpful in providing support
and, for many, is an attractive option.
Inpatient Care
Recommendations
7.33 In people with diabetes using
personal CGM, the use of CGM should
be continued when clinically appropriate
duringhospitalization,withconﬁrmatory
point-of-care glucose measurements for
insulin dosing and hypoglycemia assess-
ment and treatment under an institu-
tional protocol. B
7.34 People with diabetes who are
competent to safely use diabetes devi-
ces such as insulin pumps and CGM
systems should be supported to con-
tinue using them in an inpatient set-
ting or during outpatient procedures,
whenever possible, and when proper
supervision is available. E
Individuals who are comfortable using
their diabetes devices, such as insulin
pumps and CGM, should be allowed to
use them in an inpatient setting if they are
well enough to take care of the devices
and have brought the necessary supplies
(275–279). People with diabetes who are
familiar with treating their own glucose
levels can often adjust insulin doses more
knowledgeably than inpatient staff who
do not personally know the individual or
their management style. However, this
should occur based on the hospital’s poli-
cies for diabetes management and use of
diabetes technology, and there should be
supervision to ensure that the individual is
achieving and maintaining glycemic goals
during acute illness in a hospitalized set-
ting where factors, such as infection, cer-
tain medications, immobility, changes in
nutrition, and others, can impact insulin
sensitivity
and
the
insulin
response
(280–282).
With the advent of the coronavirus dis-
ease 2019 pandemic, the FDA exercised
enforcement discretion by allowing CGM
device use temporarily in the hospital for
patient monitoring (283). This approach
has been used to reduce the use of per-
sonal protective equipment and more
closely monitor patients so that health
care personnel do not have to go into a
patient room solely to measure a glucose
level (284–286). Studies have been pub-
lished assessing the effectiveness of this
approach, which may ultimately lead to
the approved use of CGM for monitoring
hospitalized
individuals
(278,287–296).
When used in the setting of a clinical trial
or when clinical circumstances (such as
during a shortage of personal protective
equipment) require it, CGM can be used
to manage hospitalized individuals in con-
junction with BGM. Point-of-care BGM re-
mains the approved method for glucose
monitoring in hospitals, especially for
dosing insulin and treating hypoglyce-
mia. Similarly, data are emerging on the
inpatient use of AID systems and their
challenges (278,297,298). For more in-
formation, see Section 16, “Diabetes
Care in the Hospital.”
The Future
The pace of development in diabetes
technology is extremely rapid. New ap-
proaches and tools are available each
year. It is difﬁcult for research to keep
up with these advances because newer
versions of the devices and digital solu-
tions are already on the market by the
time a study is completed. The most
important component in all of these sys-
tems is the person with diabetes. Tech-
nology selection must be appropriate for
the individual. Simply having a device or
application does not change outcomes
unless the human being engages with it
to create positive health beneﬁts. This
underscores the need for the health care
S136
Diabetes Technology
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

team to assist people with diabetes in
device and program selection and to
support their use through ongoing edu-
cation and training. Expectations must
be tempered by reality—we do not yet
have technology that completely elimi-
nates the self-care tasks necessary for
managing diabetes, but the tools de-
scribed in this section can make it easier
to manage.
References
1. Broos B, Charleer S, Bolsens N, et al. Diabetes
knowledge and metabolic control in type 1
diabetes starting with continuous glucose
monitoring: FUTURE-PEAK. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2021;106:e3037–e3048
2. Yoo JH, Kim G, Lee HJ, Sim KH, Jin SM, Kim JH.
Effect of structured individualized education on
continuous glucose monitoring use in poorly
controlled patients with type 1 diabetes: A
randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Res Clin
Pract 2022;184:109209
3. Champakanath A, Akturk HK, Alonso GT,
Snell-Bergeon JK, Shah VN. Continuous glucose
monitoring initiation within ﬁrst year of type 1
diabetes diagnosis is associated with improved
glycemic outcomes: 7-year follow-up study. Diabetes
Care 2022;45:750–753
4. Patton SR, Noser AE, Youngkin EM, Majidi S,
Clements MA. Early initiation of diabetes devices
relates to improved glycemic control in children
with recent-onset type 1 diabetes mellitus. Diabetes
Technol Ther 2019;21:379–384
5. Prahalad P, Ding VY, Zaharieva DP, et al.
Teamwork, targets, technology, and tight control
in newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes: the Pilot
4T Study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2022;107:998–
1008
6. Tanenbaum ML, Zaharieva DP, Addala A, et al.
“I was ready for it at the beginning”: parent
experiences with early introduction of continuous
glucose monitoring following their child’s type 1
diabetes diagnosis. Diabet Med 2021;38:e14567
7. Addala A, Maahs DM, Scheinker D, Chertow S,
Leverenz B, Prahalad P. Uninterrupted continuous
glucose monitoring access is associated with a
decrease in HbA1c in youth with type 1 diabetes
and public insurance. Pediatr Diabetes 2020;21:
1301–1309
8. Aronson R, Brown RE, Chu L, et al. Impact of
ﬂash glucose monitoring in people with type 2
diabetes inadequately controlled with non-insulin
antihyperglycaemic therapy (IMMEDIATE): a
randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Obes
Metab 2023;25:1024–1031
9. Leelarathna L, Evans ML, Neupane S, et al.;
FLASH-UK Trial Study Group. Intermittently scanned
continuous glucose monitoring for type 1 diabetes.
N Engl J Med 2022;387:1477–1487
10. Grace T, Salyer J. Use of real-time continuous
glucose monitoring improves glycemic control and
other clinical outcomes in type 2 diabetes patients
treated with less intensive therapy. Diabetes
Technol Ther 2022;24:26–31
11. Patil SP, Albanese-O’Neill A, Yehl K, Seley JJ,
Hughes AS. Professional competencies for diabetes
technology use in the care setting. Sci Diabetes Self
Manag Care 2022;48:437–445
12. Phillip M, Nimri R, Bergenstal RM, et al.
Consensus recommendations for the use of
automated insulin delivery technologies in clinical
practice. Endocr Rev 2023;44:254–280
13. Aleppo G, Beck RW, Bailey R, et al.; MOBILE
Study Group; Type 2 Diabetes Basal Insulin Users:
The Mobile Study (MOBILE) Study Group. The
effect of discontinuing continuous glucose
monitoring in adults with type 2 diabetes treated
with basal insulin. Diabetes Care 2021;44:2729–
2737
14. Nathan DM, Genuth S, Lachin J, et al.;
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research
Group. The effect of intensive treatment of
diabetes on the development and progression of
long-term complications in insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med 1993;329:977–
986
15. King F, Ahn D, Hsiao V, Porco T, Klonoff DC. A
review of blood glucose monitor accuracy.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2018;20:843–856
16. Brazg RL, Klaff LJ, Parkin CG. Performance
variability of seven commonly used self-monitoring
of blood glucose systems: clinical considerations for
patients and providers. J Diabetes Sci Technol
2013;7:144–152
17. Klonoff DC, Parkes JL, Kovatchev BP, et al.
Investigation of the accuracy of 18 marketed
blood glucose monitors. Diabetes Care 2018;41:
1681–1688
18. Pleus S, Ulbrich S, Zschornack E, Kamann S,
Haug C, Freckmann G. Documentation of skin-
related issues associated with continuous glucose
monitoring use in the scientiﬁc literature. Diabetes
Technol Ther 2019;21:538–545
19. Grady M, Lamps G, Shemain A, Cameron H,
Murray L. Clinical evaluation of a new, lower
pain, one touch lancing device for people with
diabetes: virtually pain-free testing and improved
comfort compared to current lancing systems. J
Diabetes Sci Technol 2021;15:53–59
20. Uslan MM, Burton DM, Clements CW. Blood
glucose meters that are accessible to blind and
visually impaired persons. J Diabetes Sci Technol
2008;2:284–287
21. Harrison B, Brown D. Accuracy of a blood
glucose monitoring system that recognizes
insufﬁcient sample blood volume and allows
application of more blood to the same test
strip. Expert Rev Med Devices 2020;17:75–82
22. Miller KM, Beck RW, Bergenstal RM, et al.;
T1D Exchange Clinic Network. Evidence of a
strong association between frequency of self-
monitoring of blood glucose and hemoglobin A1c
levels in T1D exchange clinic registry participants.
Diabetes Care 2013;36:2009–2014
23. Grant RW, Huang ES, Wexler DJ, et al.
Patients who self-monitor blood glucose and
their unused testing results. Am J Manag Care
2015;21:e119–e129
24. Katz LB, Stewart L, Guthrie B, Cameron H.
Patient satisfaction with a new, high accuracy
blood glucose meter that provides personalized
guidance, insight, and encouragement. J Diabetes
Sci Technol 2020;14:318–323
25. Shaw RJ, Yang Q, Barnes A, et al. Self-
monitoring diabetes with multiple mobile health
devices. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2020;27:667–
676
26. Gellad WF, Zhao X, Thorpe CT, Mor MK,
Good CB, Fine MJ. Dual use of Department of
Veterans Affairs and Medicare beneﬁts and use
of test strips in veterans with type 2 diabetes
mellitus. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175:26–34
27. Endocrine Society and Choosing Wisely. Five
things physicians and patients should question.
Accessed 21 September 2023. Available from
https://www.mainlinehealth.org/-/media/ﬁles/
pdf/basic-content/physicians/mlhpp/choosing
-wisely/endocrine-society–choosing-wisely.pdf
28. Ziegler R, Heidtmann B, Hilgard D, Hofer S,
Rosenbauer J; DPV-Wiss-Initiative. Frequency of
SMBG correlates with HbA1c and acute comp-
lications in children and adolescents with type 1
diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes 2011;12:11–17
29. Rosenstock J, Davies M, Home PD, Larsen J,
Koenen C, Schernthaner G. A randomised, 52-week,
treat-to-target trial comparing insulin detemir with
insulin glargine when administered as add-on to
glucose-lowering drugs in insulin-naive people with
type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia 2008;51:408–416
30. Garber AJ. Treat-to-target trials: uses, inter-
pretation and review of concepts. Diabetes Obes
Metab 2014;16:193–205
31. Farmer A, Wade A, Goyder E, et al. Impact
of self monitoring of blood glucose in the
management of patients with non-insulin treated
diabetes: open parallel group randomised trial.
BMJ 2007;335:132
32. O’Kane MJ, Bunting B, Copeland M; ESMON
Study Group. Efﬁcacy of self monitoring of blood
glucose in patients with newly diagnosed type 2
diabetes (ESMON study): randomised controlled
trial. BMJ 2008;336:1174–1177
33. Simon J, Gray A, Clarke P, Wade A, Neil A;
Diabetes Glycaemic Education and Monitoring
Trial Group. Cost effectiveness of self monitoring
of blood glucose in patients with non-insulin
treated type 2 diabetes: economic evaluation of
data from the DiGEM trial. BMJ 2008;336:
1177–1180
34. Young LA, Buse JB, Weaver MA, et al.;
Monitor Trial Group. Glucose self-monitoring in
non-insulin-treated patients with type 2 diabetes
in primary care settings: a randomized trial.
JAMA Intern Med 2017;177:920–929
35. Polonsky WH, Fisher L, Schikman CH, et al.
Structured self-monitoring of blood glucose
signiﬁcantly reduces A1C levels in poorly con-
trolled, noninsulin-treated type 2 diabetes:
results from the Structured Testing Program
study. Diabetes Care 2011;34:262–267
36. Malanda UL, Welschen LM, Riphagen II,
Dekker JM, Nijpels G, Bot SD. Self-monitoring of
blood glucose in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus who are not using insulin. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2012;1:CD005060
37. Willett LR. ACP Journal Club. Meta-analysis:
self-monitoring in non-insulin-treated type 2
diabetes improved HbA1c by 0.25%. Ann Intern
Med 2012;156:JC6–JC12
38. Mannucci E, Antenore A, Giorgino F, Scavini
M. Effects of structured versus unstructured self-
monitoring of blood glucose on glucose control in
patients with non-insulin-treated type 2 diabetes:
a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J
Diabetes Sci Technol 2018;12:183–189
39. Sai S, Urata M, Ogawa I. Evaluation of
linearity and interference effect on SMBG and
POCT devices, showing drastic high values, low
values, or error messages. J Diabetes Sci Technol
2019;13:734–743
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diabetes Technology
S137
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

40. Ginsberg BH. Factors affecting blood glucose
monitoring: sources of errors in measurement. J
Diabetes Sci Technol 2009;3:903–913
41. Tamborlane WV, Beck RW, Bode BW, et al.;
Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation Con-
tinuous Glucose Monitoring Study Group. Con-
tinuous
glucose
monitoring
and
intensive
treatment of type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med
2008;359:1464–1476
42. Tumminia A, Crimi S, Sciacca L, et al. Efﬁcacy
of real-time continuous glucose monitoring on
glycaemic control and glucose variability in type 1
diabetic patients treated with either insulin
pumps or multiple insulin injection therapy: a
randomized controlled crossover trial. Diabetes
Metab Res Rev 2015;31:61–68
43. Hansen KW, Bibby BM. The frequency of
intermittently scanned glucose and diurnal
variation of glycemic metrics. J Diabetes Sci
Technol 2022;16:1461–1465
44. Urakami T, Yoshida K, Kuwabara R, et al.
Frequent scanning using ﬂash glucose monitoring
contributes to better glycemic control in children
and adolescents with type1 diabetes. J Diabetes
Investig 2022;13:185–190
45. Lameijer A, Lommerde N, Dunn TC, et al.
Flash glucose monitoring in the Netherlands:
increased monitoring frequency is associated
with improvement of glycemic parameters. Diabetes
Res Clin Pract 2021;177:108897
46. Hohendorff J, Gumprecht J, Mysliwiec M,
Zozulinska-Ziolkiewicz D, Malecki MT. Inter-
mittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring
data of polish patients from real-life conditions:
more scanning and better glycemic control
compared to worldwide data. Diabetes Technol
Ther 2021;23:577–585
47. Aleppo G, Ruedy KJ, Riddlesworth TD,
et al.; REPLACE-BG Study Group. REPLACE-BG:
a randomized trial comparing continuous glucose
monitoring with and without routine blood
glucose monitoring in adults with well-controlled
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2017;40:538–545
48. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA
news
release:
FDA
expands
indication
for
continuous glucose monitoring system, ﬁrst to
replace ﬁngerstick testing for diabetes treatment
decisions, 2016. Accessed 21 September 2023.
Available from https://www.fda.gov/newsevents/
newsroom/pressannouncements/ucm534056
.htm
49. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA
news release: FDA approves ﬁrst continuous
glucose monitoring system for adults not requiring
blood sample calibration, 2017. Accessed 19
September 2023. Available from https://www
.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/PressAnnoun-
cements/ucm577890.htm
50. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Product
classiﬁcation [database]. Accessed 21 September
2023. Available from https://www.accessdata.fda
.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfpcd/classiﬁcation.cfm
51. Beck RW, Riddlesworth T, Ruedy K, et al.;
DIAMOND Study Group. Effect of continuous
glucose monitoring on glycemic control in adults
with type 1 diabetes using insulin injections: the
DIAMOND randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2017;
317:371–378
52. Lind M, Polonsky W, Hirsch IB, et al.
Continuous glucose monitoring vs conventional
therapy for glycemic control in adults with type 1
diabetes treated with multiple daily insulin
injections: the GOLD randomized clinical trial.
JAMA 2017;317:379–387
53. Riddlesworth T, Price D, Cohen N, Beck RW.
Hypoglycemic event frequency and the effect of
continuous glucose monitoring in adults with
type 1 diabetes using multiple daily insulin
injections. Diabetes Ther 2017;8:947–951
54. Sequeira PA, Montoya L, Ruelas V, et al.
Continuous glucose monitoring pilot in low-
income type 1 diabetes patients. Diabetes Technol
Ther 2013;15:855–858
55. Bolinder J, Antuna R, Geelhoed-Duijvestijn P,
Kr€oger J, Weitgasser R. Novel glucose-sensing
technology and hypoglycaemia in type 1 diabetes:
a multicentre, non-masked, randomised controlled
trial. Lancet 2016;388:2254–2263
56. Hermanns N, Schumann B, Kulzer B, Haak T.
The impact of continuous glucose monitoring on
low interstitial glucose values and low blood
glucose values assessed by point-of-care blood
glucose meters: results of a crossover trial. J
Diabetes Sci Technol 2014;8:516–522
57. van Beers CA, DeVries JH, Kleijer SJ, et al.
Continuous glucose monitoring for patients with
type 1 diabetes and impaired awareness of
hypoglycaemia (IN CONTROL): a randomised,
open-label,
crossover
trial.
Lancet
Diabetes
Endocrinol 2016;4:893–902
58. Battelino T, Conget I, Olsen B, et al.; SWITCH
Study Group. The use and efﬁcacy of continuous
glucose monitoring in type 1 diabetes treated
with
insulin
pump
therapy:
a
randomised
controlled trial. Diabetologia 2012;55:3155–3162
59. Pratley RE, Kanapka LG, Rickels MR, et al.;
Wireless Innovation for Seniors With Diabetes
Mellitus (WISDM) Study Group. Effect of continuous
glucose monitoring on hypoglycemia in older adults
with type 1 diabetes: a randomized clinical trial.
JAMA 2020;323:2397–2406
60. Deiss D, Bolinder J, Riveline JP, et al.
Improved glycemic control in poorly controlled
patients with type 1 diabetes using real-time
continuous glucose monitoring. Diabetes Care
2006;29:2730–2732
61. O’Connell MA, Donath S, O’Neal DN, et al.
Glycaemic impact of patient-led use of sensor-
guided pump therapy in type 1 diabetes: a
randomised controlled trial. Diabetologia 2009;
52:1250–1257
62. Battelino T, Phillip M, Bratina N, Nimri R,
Oskarsson P, Bolinder J. Effect of continuous
glucose monitoring on hypoglycemia in type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2011;34:795–800
63. Heinemann L, Freckmann G, Ehrmann D,
et al. Real-time continuous glucose monitoring in
adults with type 1 diabetes and impaired
hypoglycaemia awareness or severe hypogly-
caemia
treated
with
multiple
daily
insulin
injections (HypoDE): a multicentre, randomised
controlled trial. Lancet 2018;391:1367–1377
64. Beck RW, Hirsch IB, Laffel L, et al.; Juvenile
Diabetes Research Foundation Continuous Glucose
Monitoring Study Group. The effect of continuous
glucose monitoring in well-controlled type 1 dia-
betes. Diabetes Care 2009;32:1378–1383
65. Laffel LM, Kanapka LG, Beck RW, et al.; CGM
Intervention in Teens and Young Adults with T1D
(CITY) Study Group; CDE10. Effect of continuous
glucose
monitoring
on
glycemic
control
in
adolescents and young adults with type 1 diabetes:
a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2020;323:2388–
2396
66. Strategies to Enhance New CGM Use in Early
Childhood (SENCE) Study Group. A randomized
clinical trial assessing continuous glucose monitoring
(CGM) use with standardized education with or
without a family behavioral intervention compared
with ﬁngerstick blood glucose monitoring in very
young children with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care
2021;44:464–472
67. Garg
S,
Zisser
H,
Schwartz
S,
et
al.
Improvement in glycemic excursions with a
transcutaneous, real-time continuous glucose
sensor: a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes
Care 2006;29:44–50
68. New JP, Ajjan R, Pfeiffer AF, Freckmann G.
Continuous glucose monitoring in people with
diabetes: the randomized controlled Glucose
Level Awareness in Diabetes Study (GLADIS).
Diabet Med 2015;32:609–617
69. Beck RW, Riddlesworth TD, Ruedy K, et al.;
DIAMOND Study Group. Continuous glucose
monitoring versus usual care in patients with
type 2 diabetes receiving multiple daily insulin
injections: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med
2017;167:365–374
70. Ehrhardt NM, Chellappa M, Walker MS,
Fonda SJ, Vigersky RA. The effect of real-time
continuous glucose monitoring on glycemic
control in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
J Diabetes Sci Technol 2011;5:668–675
71. Yoo HJ, An HG, Park SY, et al. Use of a real
time continuous glucose monitoring system as a
motivational device for poorly controlled type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2008;82:73–79
72. Martens T, Beck RW, Bailey R, et al.; MOBILE
Study Group.
Effect of continuous glucose
monitoring on glycemic control in patients with
type 2 diabetes treated with basal insulin: a
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2021;325:2262–
2272
73. Gubitosi-Klug RA, Braffett BH, Bebu I, et al.
Continuous glucose monitoring in adults with
type 1 diabetes with 35 years duration from the
DCCT/EDIC study. Diabetes Care 2022;45:659–
665
74. Teo E, Hassan N,Tam W, Koh S. Effectiveness
of continuous glucose monitoring in maintaining
glycaemic control among people with type 1
diabetes
mellitus:
a
systematic
review
of
randomised controlled trials and meta-analysis.
Diabetologia 2022;65:604–619
75. Garg SK, Liljenquist D, Bode B, et al.
Evaluation of accuracy and safety of the next-
generation up to 180-day long-term implantable
eversense continuous glucose monitoring system:
the PROMISE study. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;
24:84–92
76. Garg SK, Kipnes M, Castorino K, et al.
Accuracy and safety of Dexcom G7 continuous
glucose monitoring in adults with diabetes.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:373–380
77. Laffel LM, Bailey TS, Christiansen MP, Reid JL,
Beck SE. Accuracy of a seventh-generation con-
tinuous glucose monitoring system in children and
adolescents with type 1 diabetes. J Diabetes Sci
Technol 2023;17:962–967
78. Miller KM, Kanapka LG, Rickels MR, et al.
Beneﬁt of continuous glucose monitoring in
reducing hypoglycemia is sustained through 12
months of use among older adults with type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:424–
434
S138
Diabetes Technology
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

79. Bao S, Bailey R, Calhoun P, Beck RW.
Effectiveness of continuous glucose monitoring
in older adults with type 2 diabetes treated with
basal insulin. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:
299–306
80. Van Name MA, Kanapka LG, DiMeglio LA,
et al. Long-term continuous glucose monitor use
in very young children with type 1 diabetes: one-
year results from the SENCE study. J Diabetes Sci
Technol 2023;17:976–987
81. Price DA, Deng Q, Kipnes M, Beck SE.
Episodic real-time CGM use in adults with type 2
diabetes: results of a pilot randomized controlled
trial. Diabetes Ther 2021;12:2089–2099
82. Haak T, Hanaire H, Ajjan R, Hermanns N,
Riveline JP, Rayman G. Flash glucose-sensing
technology as a replacement for blood glucose
monitoring for the management of insulin-
treated type 2 diabetes: a multicenter, open-
label randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Ther
2017;8:55–73
83. Yaron M, Roitman E, Aharon-Hananel G,
et
al.
Effect
of
ﬂash
glucose
monitoring
technology on glycemic control and treatment
satisfaction in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes Care 2019;42:1178–1184
84. Davis TME, Dwyer P, England M, Fegan PG,
Davis WA. Efﬁcacy of intermittently scanned
continuous glucose monitoring in the prevention
of recurrent severe hypoglycemia. Diabetes
Technol Ther 2020;22:367–373
85. Boucher SE, Gray AR, Wiltshire EJ, et al.
Effect of 6 months of ﬂash glucose monitoring in
youth with type 1 diabetes and high-risk glycemic
control: a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes
Care 2020;43:2388–2395
86. Deshmukh H, Wilmot EG, Gregory R, et al.
Effect of ﬂash glucose monitoring on glycemic
control, hypoglycemia, diabetes-related distress,
and resource utilization in the Association of
British Clinical Diabetologists (ABCD) nationwide
audit. Diabetes Care 2020;43:2153–2160
87. Charleer S, Gillard P,Vandoorne E, Cammaerts
K, Mathieu C, Casteels K. Intermittently scanned
continuous glucose monitoring is associated with
high satisfaction but increased HbA1c and weight
in well-controlled youth with type 1 diabetes.
Pediatr Diabetes 2020;21:1465–1474
88. Al Hayek A, Al Dawish M, El Jammal M. The
impact of ﬂash glucose monitoring on markers
of glycaemic control and patient satisfaction in
type 2 diabetes. Cureus 2021;13:e16007
89. Nathanson D, Svensson AM, Miftaraj M,
Franzen S, Bolinder J, Eeg-Olofsson K. Effect of
ﬂash glucose monitoring in adults with type 1
diabetes: a nationwide, longitudinal observational
study of 14,372 ﬂash users compared with 7691
glucose sensor naive controls. Diabetologia 2021;
64:1595–1603
90. Roussel R, Riveline JP, Vicaut E, et al.
Important drop in rate
of
acute
diabetes
complications in people with type 1 or type 2
diabetes
after
initiation
of
ﬂash
glucose
monitoring in france: the RELIEF study. Diabetes
Care 2021;44:1368–1376
91. Riveline JP, Roussel R, Vicaut E, et al.
Reduced rate of acute diabetes events with ﬂash
glucose monitoring is sustained for 2 years after
initiation: extended outcomes from the RELIEF
study. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:611–618
92. Wright EE Jr, Kerr MSD, Reyes IJ, Nabutovsky
Y, Miller E. Use of ﬂash continuous glucose
monitoring is associated with A1C reduction in
people with type 2 diabetes treated with basal
insulin or noninsulin therapy. Diabetes Spectr
2021;34:184–189
93. Charleer S, De Block C, Van Huffel L, et al.
Quality of life and glucose control after 1 year
of nationwide reimbursement of intermittently
scanned continuous glucose monitoring in adults
living with type 1 diabetes (FUTURE): a pro-
spective observational real-world cohort study.
Diabetes Care 2020;43:389–397
94. Elliott T, Beca S, Beharry R, Tsoukas MA,
Zarruk A, Abitbol A. The impact of ﬂash glucose
monitoring on glycated hemoglobin in type 2
diabetes managed with basal insulin in Canada: a
retrospective real-world chart review study. Diab
Vasc Dis Res 2021;18:14791641211021374
95. Tyndall V, Stimson RH, Zammitt NN, et al.
Marked improvement in HbA1c following com-
mencement of ﬂash glucose monitoring in
people with type 1 diabetes. Diabetologia 2019;
62:1349–1356
96. Karter AJ, Parker MM, Moffet HH, Gilliam LK,
Dlott R. Association of real-time continuous
glucose monitoring with glycemic control and
acute metabolic events among patients with
insulin-treated diabetes. JAMA 2021;325:2273–
2284
97. Reddy
M,
Jugnee
N,
El
Laboudi
A,
Spanudakis
E, Anantharaja S,
Oliver N. A
randomized controlled pilot study of continuous
glucose monitoring and ﬂash glucose monitoring
in people with type 1 diabetes and impaired
awareness of hypoglycaemia. Diabet Med 2018;
35:483–490
98. Haskova A, Radovnicka L, Petruzelkova L,
et al. Real-time CGM is superior to ﬂash glucose
monitoring for glucose control in type 1 diabetes:
the
CORRIDA
randomized
controlled
trial.
Diabetes Care 2020;43:2744–2750
99. Visser MM, Charleer S, Fieuws S, et al.
Comparing real-time and intermittently scanned
continuous glucose monitoring in adults with
type 1 diabetes (ALERTT1): a 6-month, prospective,
multicentre, randomised controlled trial. Lancet
2021;397:2275–2283
100. Sandig D, Grimsmann J, Reinauer C, et al.
Continuous glucose monitoring in adults with
type 1 diabetes: real-world data from the
German/Austrian prospective diabetes follow-up
registry. Diabetes Technol Ther 2020;22:602–612
101. Radovnicka L, Haskova A, Do QD, et al.
Lower glycated hemoglobin with real-time con-
tinuous glucose monitoring than with inter-
mittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring
after 1 year: the CORRIDA LIFE study. Diabetes
Technol Ther 2022;24:859–867
102. Danne T, Nimri R, Battelino T, et al.
International consensus on use of continuous
glucose monitoring. Diabetes Care 2017;40:
1631–1640
103. Battelino T, Danne T, Bergenstal RM, et al.
Clinical targets for continuous glucose monitoring
data interpretation: recommendations from the
International Consensus on Time in Range.
Diabetes Care 2019;42:1593–1603
104. Szmuilowicz
ED,
Aleppo
G.
Stepwise
approach to continuous glucose monitoring
interpretation for internists and family physicians.
Postgrad Med 2022;134:743–751
105. Isaacs D, Cox C, Schwab K, et al.Technology
integration: the role of the diabetes care and
education specialist in practice. Diabetes Educ
2020;46:323–334
106. Rosenfeld C, Blevins T, Aleppo G, et al.
Expert
roundtable
on
continuous
glucose
monitoring. Endocr Pract 2022;28:622–627
107. Lee GS, Lupsa BC. Continuous glucose
monitoring for the internist. Med Clin North Am
2021;105:967–982
108. Johnson ML, Martens TW, Criego AB,
Carlson AL, Simonson GD, Bergenstal RM. Utilizing
the ambulatory glucose proﬁle to standardize and
implement continuous glucose monitoring in
clinical practice. Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21(S2):
S217–S225
109. Abbott. U.S. FDA clears Abbott’s Freestyle
Libre 2 and Freestyle Libre 3 sensors for inte-
gration with automated insulin delivery systems.
Accessed 19 September 2023. Available from
https://abbott.mediaroom.com/2023-03-06-U-S
-FDA-Clears-Abbotts-FreeStyle-Libre-R-2-and
-FreeStyle-Libre-R-3-Sensors-for-Integration
-with-Automated-Insulin-Delivery-Systems
110. Dexcom, Inc. Dexcom G7 Continuous
Glucose Monitoring System. Integrated Con-
tinuous Glucose Monitoring System, Factory
Calibrated. Accessed 21 September 2023. Available
from https://fda.report/PMN/K213919
111. Feig DS, Donovan LE, Corcoy R, et al.;
CONCEPTT
Collaborative
Group.
Continuous
glucose monitoring in pregnant women with
type 1 diabetes (CONCEPTT): a multicentre
international randomised controlled trial. Lancet
2017;390:2347–2359
112. Kristensen K, €Ogge LE, Sengpiel V, et al.
Continuous glucose monitoring in pregnant
women with type 1 diabetes: an observational
cohort study of 186 pregnancies. Diabetologia
2019;62:1143–1153
113. Law GR, Gilthorpe MS, Secher AL, et al.
Translating HbA1c measurements into estimated
average glucose values in pregnant women with
diabetes. Diabetologia 2017;60:618–624
114. Secher AL, Ringholm L, Andersen HU,
Damm P, Mathiesen ER. The effect of real-time
continuous
glucose
monitoring
in
pregnant
women with diabetes: a randomized controlled
trial. Diabetes Care 2013;36:1877–1883
115. Wei Q, Sun Z, Yang Y, Yu H, Ding H, Wang S.
Effect of a CGMS and SMBG on maternal and
neonatal
outcomes
in
gestational
diabetes
mellitus: a randomized controlled trial. Sci Rep
2016;6:19920
116. Garcıa-Moreno RM, Benıtez-Valderrama P,
Barquiel B, et al. Efﬁcacy of continuous glucose
monitoring on maternal and neonatal outcomes
in gestational diabetes mellitus: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical
trials. Diabet Med 2022;39:e14703
117. Wyckoff JA, Brown FM. Time in range in
pregnancy: is there a role? Diabetes Spectr
2021;34:119–132
118. Ajjan
RA,
Jackson
N,
Thomson
SA.
Reduction in HbA1c using professional ﬂash
glucose monitoring in insulin-treated type 2
diabetes patients managed in primary and
secondary care settings: a pilot, multicentre,
randomised controlled trial. Diab Vasc Dis Res
2019;16:385–395
119. Ribeiro RT, Andrade R, Nascimento do OD,
Lopes
AF,
Raposo
JF.
Impact
of
blinded
retrospective continuous glucose monitoring on
clinical decision making and glycemic control in
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diabetes Technology
S139
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

persons with type 2 diabetes on insulin therapy.
Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2021;31:1267–1275
120. Wada E, Onoue T, Kobayashi T, et al. Flash
glucose monitoring helps achieve better glycemic
control than conventional self-monitoring of
blood glucose in non-insulin-treated type 2
diabetes: a randomized controlled trial. BMJ
Open Diabetes Res Care 2020;8:e001115
121. Fantasia KL, Stockman MC, Ju Z, et al.
Professional continuous glucose monitoring and
endocrinology eConsult for adults with type 2
diabetes in primary care: results of a clinical pilot
program. J Clin Transl Endocrinol 2021;24:100254
122. Simonson GD, Bergenstal RM, Johnson ML,
Davidson JL, Martens TW. Effect of professional
CGM (pCGM) on glucose management in type 2
diabetes patients in primary care. J Diabetes Sci
Technol 2021;15:539–545
123. Ulrich H, Bowen M. The clinical utility of
professional continuous glucose monitoring by
pharmacists for patients with type 2 diabetes. J
Am Pharm Assoc (2003) 2021;61:e76–e82
124. Herman A, de Montjoye L, Baeck M.
Adverse cutaneous reaction to diabetic glucose
sensors and insulin pumps: irritant contact
dermatitis or allergic contact dermatitis? Contact
Dermat 2020;83:25–30
125. Rigo RS, Levin LE, Belsito DV, Garzon MC,
Gandica R, Williams KM. Cutaneous reactions to
continuous glucose monitoring and continuous
subcutaneous insulin infusion devices in type 1
diabetes mellitus. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2021;
15:786–791
126. Kamann S, Aerts O, Heinemann L. Further
evidence of severe allergic contact dermatitis
from isobornyl acrylate while using a continuous
glucose monitoring system. J Diabetes Sci Technol
2018;12:630–633
127. Aerts O, Herman A, Bruze M, Goossens A,
Mowitz M. FreeStyle Libre: contact irritation
versus contact allergy. Lancet 2017;390:1644
128. Herman A, Aerts O, Baeck M, et al. Allergic
contact dermatitis caused by isobornyl acrylate
in Freestyle Libre, a newly introduced glucose
sensor. Contact Dermat 2017;77:367–373
129. Hyry HSI, Liippo JP, Virtanen HM. Allergic
contact dermatitis caused by glucose sensors in
type 1 diabetes patients. Contact Dermat 2019;81:
161–166
130. Asarani NAM, Reynolds AN, Boucher SE, de
Bock M, Wheeler BJ. Cutaneous complications
with continuous or ﬂash glucose monitoring use:
systematic review of trials and observational
studies. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2020;14:328–337
131. Lombardo F, Salzano G, Crisafulli G, et al.
Allergic contact dermatitis in pediatric patients
with type 1 diabetes: an emerging issue. Diabetes
Res Clin Pract 2020;162:108089
132. Oppel E, Kamann S, Heinemann L, Reichl
FX, H€ogg C. The implanted glucose monitoring
system Eversense: an alternative for diabetes
patients with isobornyl acrylate allergy. Contact
Dermat 2020;82:101–104
133. Freckmann G, Buck S, Waldenmaier D,
et al. Skin reaction report form: development
and design of a standardized report form for skin
reactions due to medical devices for diabetes
management. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2021;15:
801–806
134. Deiss D, Irace C, Carlson G, Tweden KS,
Kaufman FR. Real-world safety of an implantable
continuous glucose sensor over multiple cycles of
use: a post-market registry study. Diabetes Technol
Ther 2020;22:48–52
135. Sanchez P, Ghosh-Dastidar S, Tweden KS,
Kaufman FR. Real-world data from the ﬁrst U.S.
commercial users of an implantable continuous
glucose sensor. Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:
677–681
136. Heinemann L. Interferences with CGM
systems: practical relevance? J Diabetes Sci Technol
2022;16:271–274
137. Tellez SE, Hornung LN, Courter JD, et al.
Inaccurate glucose sensor values after hydroxyurea
administration. Diabetes Technol Ther 2021;23:
443–451
138. Szmuilowicz ED, Aleppo G. Interferent
effect of hydroxyurea on continuous glucose
monitoring. Diabetes Care 2021;44:e89–e90
139. Pf€utzner
A,
Jensch
H,
Cardinal
C,
Srikanthamoorthy G, Riehn E,Thome N. Laboratory
protocol and pilot results for dynamic interference
testing of continuous glucose monitoring sensors. J
Diabetes Sci Technol. 13 May 2022 (Epub ahead of
print]. DOI: 10.1177/19322968221095573
140. Lorenz C, Sandoval W, Mortellaro M.
Interference assessment of various endogenous
and exogenous substances on the performance
of the Eversense long-term implantable continuous
glucose monitoring system. Diabetes Technol Ther
2018;20:344–352
141. Denham D. Effect of repeated doses of
acetaminophen on a continuous glucose monitoring
system with permselective membrane. J Diabetes
Sci Technol 2021;15:517–518
142. U.S.
Food
and
Drug
Administration.
Summary of safety and effectiveness data (SSED).
Continuous glucose monitor (CGM), implanted,
adjunctive use, 2018. Accessed 21 September
2023. Available from https://www.accessdata.fda
.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf16/P160048B.pdf
143. Piras de Oliveira C, Mitchell BD, Fan L, et al.
Patient perspectives on the use of half-unit
insulin pens by people with type 1 diabetes: a
cross-sectional observational study. Curr Med
Res Opin 2021;37:45–51
144. Machry RV, Cipriani GF, Pedroso HU, et al.
Pens versus syringes to deliver insulin among
elderly
patients
with
type
2
diabetes:
a
randomized controlled clinical trial. Diabetol
Metab Syndr 2021;13:64
145. Korytkowski M, Bell D, Jacobsen C; FlexPen
Study Team. A multicenter, randomized, open-
label, comparative, two-period crossover trial of
preference, efﬁcacy, and safety proﬁles of a
preﬁlled, disposable pen and conventional vial/
syringe for insulin injection in patients with type 1
or 2 diabetes mellitus. Clin Ther 2003;25:2836–
2848
146. Asche CV, Shane-McWhorter L, Raparla S.
Health economics and compliance of vials/
syringes versus pen devices: a review of the
evidence. Diabetes Technol Ther 2010;12(Suppl.
1):S101–S108
147. Singh R, Samuel C, Jacob JJ. A comparison
of insulin pen devices and disposable plastic
syringes—simplicity, safety, convenience and cost
differences. Eur Endocrinol 2018;14:47–51
148. Frid AH, Kreugel G, Grassi G, et al. New
insulin delivery recommendations. Mayo Clin
Proc 2016;91:1231–1255
149. Lasalvia P, Barahona-Correa JE, Romero-
Alvernia DM, et al. Pen devices for insulin self-
administration compared with needle and vial:
systematic review of the literature and meta-
analysis. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2016;10:959–966
150. Slabaugh SL, Bouchard JR, Li Y, Baltz JC,
Meah YA, Moretz DC. Characteristics relating to
adherence and persistence to basal insulin
regimens among elderly insulin-naïve patients
with type 2 diabetes: pre-ﬁlled pens versus vials/
syringes. Adv Ther 2015;32:1206–1221
151. Chandran A, Bonafede MK, Nigam S,
Saltiel-Berzin R, Hirsch LJ, Lahue BJ. Adherence to
insulin pen therapy is associated with reduction
in healthcare costs among patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus. Am Health Drug Beneﬁts 2015;
8:148–158
152. Pawaskar MD, Camacho FT, Anderson RT,
Cobden D, Joshi AV, Balkrishnan R. Health care
costs and medication adherence associated with
initiation of insulin pen therapy in Medicaid-
enrolled patients with type 2 diabetes: a
retrospective database analysis. Clin Ther 2007;
29:1294–1305
153. Seggelke SA, Hawkins RM, Gibbs J, Rasouli
N, Wang CC, Draznin B. Effect of glargine insulin
delivery method (pen device versus vial/syringe)
on glycemic control and patient preferences in
patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Endocr
Pract 2014;20:536–539
154. Ahmann A, Szeinbach SL, Gill J, Traylor L,
Garg SK. Comparing patient preferences and
healthcare provider recommendations with the
pen versus vial-and-syringe insulin delivery in
patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Technol
Ther 2014;16:76–83
155. Asche CV, Luo W, Aagren M. Differences in
rates of hypoglycemia and health care costs in
patients treated with insulin aspart in pens
versus vials. Curr Med Res Opin 2013;29:1287–
1296
156. Eby EL, Boye KS, Lage MJ. The association
between use of mealtime insulin pens versus
vials and healthcare charges and resource
utilization in patients with type 2 diabetes: a
retrospective cohort study. J Med Econ 2013;16:
1231–1237
157. Anderson BJ, Redondo MJ. What can we
learn from patient-reported outcomes of insulin
pen devices? J Diabetes Sci Technol 2011;5:
1563–1571
158. Luijf YM, DeVries JH. Dosing accuracy of
insulin pens versus conventional syringes and
vials. Diabetes Technol Ther 2010;12(Suppl. 1):
S73–S77
159. Ignaut DA, Schwartz SL, Sarwat S, Murphy
HL. Comparative device assessments: Humalog
KwikPen compared with vial and syringe and
FlexPen. Diabetes Educ 2009;35:789–798
160. Hanas R, de Beaufort C, Hoey H, Anderson
B. Insulin delivery by injection in children and
adolescents with diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes 2011;
12:518–526
161. Pf€utzner A, Schipper C, Niemeyer M, et al.
Comparison of patient preference for two insulin
injection pen devices in relation to patient
dexterity skills. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2012;6:910–
916
162. Reinauer KM, Joksch G, Renn W, Eggstein
M. Insulin pens in elderly diabetic patients.
Diabetes Care 1990;13:1136–1137
163. Thomas DR, Fischer RG, Nicholas WC,
Beghe C, Hatten KW, Thomas JN. Disposable
insulin syringe reuse and aseptic practices in
S140
Diabetes Technology
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

diabetic patients. J Gen Intern Med 1989;4:
97–100
164. Seo J, Heidenreich S, Aldalooj E, et al.
Patients’ preferences for connected insulin pens:
a discrete choice experiment among patients
with type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Patient 2023;16:
127–138
165. Bailey TS, Stone JY. A novel pen-based
Bluetooth-enabled insulin delivery system with
insulin dose tracking and advice. Expert Opin
Drug Deliv 2017;14:697–703
166. Eiland L, McLarney M,Thangavelu T, Drincic
A. App-based insulin calculators: current and
future state. Curr Diab Rep 2018;18:123
167. Breton MD, Patek SD, Lv D, et al. Continuous
glucose monitoring and insulin informed advisory
system with automated titration and dosing of
insulin reduces glucose variability in type 1 diabetes
mellitus. Diabetes Technol Ther 2018;20:531–540
168. Bergenstal RM, Johnson M, Passi R, et al.
Automated insulin dosing guidance to optimise
insulin management in patients with type 2
diabetes: a multicentre, randomised controlled
trial. Lancet 2019;393:1138–1148
169. Schneider JE, Parikh A, Stojanovic I. Impact
of a novel insulin management service on non-
insulin pharmaceutical expenses. J Health Econ
Outcomes Res 2018;6:53–62
170. Huckvale K, Adomaviciute S, Prieto JT, Leow
MK, Car J. Smartphone apps for calculating
insulin dose: a systematic assessment. BMC Med
2015;13:106
171. Yeh HC, Brown TT, Maruthur N, et al.
Comparative effectiveness and safety of methods
of insulin delivery and glucose monitoring for
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Ann Intern Med 2012;157:336–347
172. Aleppo G, DeSalvo DJ, Lauand F, et al.
Improvements in glycemic outcomes in 4738
children, adolescents, and adults with type 1
diabetes initiating a tubeless insulin management
system. Diabetes Ther 2023;14:593–610
173. Lin MH, Connor CG, Ruedy KJ, et al.;
Pediatric Diabetes Consortium. Race, socioeconomic
status, and treatment center are associated with
insulin pump therapy in youth in the ﬁrst year
following diagnosis of type 1 diabetes. Diabetes
Technol Ther 2013;15:929–934
174. Willi SM, Miller KM, DiMeglio LA, et al.; T1D
Exchange Clinic Network. Racial-ethnic disparities
in management and outcomes among children
with type 1 diabetes. Pediatrics 2015;135:424–
434
175. Redondo MJ, Libman I, Cheng P, et al.;
Pediatric
Diabetes
Consortium.
Racial/ethnic
minority youth with recent-onset type 1 diabetes
have poor prognostic factors. Diabetes Care
2018;41:1017–1024
176. Ramchandani N, Ten S, Anhalt H, et al.
Insulin pump therapy from the time of diagnosis
of type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2006;
8:663–670
177. Berghaeuser MA, Kapellen T, Heidtmann B,
Haberland H, Klinkert C; German Working Group
for Insulin Pump Treatment in Paediatric Patients.
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion in
toddlers starting at diagnosis of type 1 diabetes
mellitus. A multicenter analysis of 104 patients
from 63 centres in Germany and Austria. Pediatr
Diabetes 2008;9:590–595
178. Peters AL, Ahmann AJ, Battelino T, et al.
Diabetes technology—continuous subcutaneous
insulin infusion therapy and continuous glucose
monitoring in adults: an Endocrine Society clinical
practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;
101:3922–3937
179. Gill M, Chhabra H, Shah M, Zhu C,
Grunberger G. C-peptide and beta-cell autoantibody
testing prior to initiating continuous subcutaneous
insulin infusion pump therapy did not improve
utilization or medical costs among older adults with
diabetes mellitus. Endocr Pract 2018;24:634–645
180. Vigersky RA, Huang S, Cordero TL, et al.;
OpT2mise Study Group. Improved Hba1c, total
daily insulin dose, and treatment satisfaction
with insulin pump therapy compared to multiple
daily insulin injections in patients with type 2
diabetes irrespective of baseline C-peptide levels.
Endocr Pract 2018;24:446–452
181. Wheeler BJ, Heels K, Donaghue KC, Reith
DM, Ambler GR. Insulin pump-associated adverse
events in children and adolescents—a prospective
study. Diabetes Technol Ther 2014;16:558–562
182. Kordonouri O, Lauterborn R, Deiss D.
Lipohypertrophy in young patients with type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2002;25:634
183. Kordonouri O, Hartmann R, Remus K, Bl€asig
S, Sadeghian E, Danne T. Beneﬁt of supplementary
fat plus protein counting as compared with
conventional carbohydrate counting for insulin
bolus calculation in children with pump therapy.
Pediatr Diabetes 2012;13:540–544
184. Guinn TS, Bailey GJ, Mecklenburg RS.
Factors related to discontinuation of continuous
subcutaneous insulin-infusion therapy. Diabetes
Care 1988;11:46–51
185. Wong JC, Boyle C, DiMeglio LA, et al.; T1D
Exchange Clinic Network. Evaluation of pump
discontinuation and associated factors in the T1D
Exchange Clinic Registry. J Diabetes Sci Technol
2017;11:224–232
186. Wong JC, Dolan LM, Yang TT, Hood KK.
Insulin pump use and glycemic control in
adolescents with type 1 diabetes: predictors of
change in method of insulin delivery across two
years. Pediatr Diabetes 2015;16:592–599
187. Plotnick LP, Clark LM, Brancati FL, Erlinger T.
Safety and effectiveness of insulin pump therapy
in children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes.
Diabetes Care 2003;26:1142–1146
188. Redondo MJ, Connor CG, Ruedy KJ, et al.;
Pediatric Diabetes Consortium. Pediatric Diabetes
Consortium Type 1 Diabetes New Onset (NeOn)
study: factors associated with HbA1c levels one
year after diagnosis. Pediatr Diabetes 2014;15:
294–302
189. Doyle EA, Weinzimer SA, Steffen AT, Ahern
JA, Vincent M, Tamborlane WV. A randomized,
prospective trial comparing the efﬁcacy of
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion with
multiple daily injections using insulin glargine.
Diabetes Care 2004;27:1554–1558
190. Alemzadeh R, Ellis JN, Holzum MK, Parton
EA, Wyatt DT. Beneﬁcial effects of continuous
subcutaneous
insulin
infusion
and
ﬂexible
multiple daily insulin regimen using insulin
glargine in type 1 diabetes. Pediatrics 2004;114:
e91–e95
191. Sherr JL, Hermann JM, Campbell F, et al.;
T1D Exchange Clinic Network, the DPV Initiative,
and the National Paediatric Diabetes Audit and
the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health
registries. Use of insulin pump therapy in
children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes
and its impact on metabolic control: comparison
of
results
from
three
large,
transatlantic
paediatric registries. Diabetologia 2016;59:87–91
192. Jeitler K, Horvath K, Berghold A, et al.
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion versus
multiple daily insulin injections in patients with
diabetes mellitus: systematic review and meta-
analysis. Diabetologia 2008;51:941–951
193. Karges B, Schwandt A, Heidtmann B, et al.
Association of insulin pump therapy vs insulin
injection
therapy
with
severe
hypoglycemia,
ketoacidosis, and glycemic control among children,
adolescents, and young adults with type 1 diabetes.
JAMA 2017;318:1358–1366
194. Haynes A, Hermann JM, Miller KM, et al.;
T1D Exchange, WACDD and DPV registries.
Severe hypoglycemia rates are not associated
with
HbA1c:
a
cross-sectional
analysis
of
3
contemporary pediatric diabetes registry databases.
Pediatr Diabetes 2017;18:643–650
195. Pickup JC, Sutton AJ. Severe hypoglycaemia
and glycaemic control in type 1 diabetes: meta-
analysis
of
multiple
daily
insulin injections
compared with continuous subcutaneous insulin
infusion. Diabet Med 2008;25:765–774
196. Birkebaek NH, Drivvoll AK, Aakeson K, et al.
Incidence of severe hypoglycemia in children
with type 1 diabetes in the Nordic countries in
the period 2008-2012: association with hemo-
globin A1c and treatment modality. BMJ Open
Diabetes Res Care 2017;5:e000377
197. Maahs DM, Hermann JM, Holman N, et al.;
National Paediatric Diabetes Audit and the Royal
College of Paediatrics and Child Health, the DPV
Initiative, and the T1D Exchange Clinic Network.
Rates of diabetic ketoacidosis: international
comparison with 49,859 pediatric patients with
type 1 diabetes from England, Wales, the U.S.,
Austria, and Germany. Diabetes Care 2015;38:
1876–1882
198. Weintrob N, Benzaquen H, Galatzer A, et al.
Comparison of continuous subcutaneous insulin
infusion and multiple daily injection regimens in
children with type 1 diabetes: a randomized
open crossover trial. Pediatrics 2003;112:559–
564
199. Opipari-Arrigan L, Fredericks EM, Burkhart
N, Dale L, Hodge M, Foster C. Continuous
subcutaneous insulin infusion beneﬁts quality of
life in preschool-age children with type 1 diabetes
mellitus. Pediatr Diabetes 2007;8:377–383
200. Sundberg F, Barnard K, Cato A, et al. ISPAD
guidelines.
Managing diabetes in
preschool
children. Pediatr Diabetes 2017;18:499–517
201. Commissariat PV, Boyle CT, Miller KM, et al.
Insulin pump use in young children with type 1
diabetes: sociodemographic factors and parent-
reported barriers. Diabetes Technol Ther 2017;
19:363–369
202. Forlenza GP, Li Z, Buckingham BA, et al.
Predictive low-glucose suspend reduces hypo-
glycemia in adults, adolescents, and children with
type 1 diabetes in an at-home randomized cross-
over study: results of the PROLOG trial. Diabetes
Care 2018;41:2155–2161
203. Wood MA, Shulman DI, Forlenza GP, et al.
In-clinic evaluation of the MiniMed 670G system
“suspend before low” feature in children with
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2018;
20:731–737
204. Beato-Vıbora PI, Quiros-Lopez C, Lazaro-
Martın L, et al. Impact of sensor-augmented
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diabetes Technology
S141
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

pump
therapy
with
predictive
low-glucose
suspend function on glycemic control and patient
satisfaction in adults and children with type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2018;20:738–
743
205. Brown SA, Beck RW, Raghinaru D, et al.;
iDCL Trial Research Group. Glycemic outcomes of
use of CLC versus PLGS in type 1 diabetes: a
randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care 2020;
43:1822–1828
206. Bergenstal RM, Garg S,Weinzimer SA, et al.
Safety of a hybrid closed-loop insulin delivery
system in patients with type 1 diabetes. JAMA
2016;316:1407–1408
207. Garg SK, Weinzimer SA, Tamborlane WV,
et al. Glucose outcomes with the in-home use of
a hybrid closed-loop insulin delivery system in
adolescents and adults with type 1 diabetes.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2017;19:155–163
208. Tauschmann M, Thabit H, Bally L, et al.;
APCam11 Consortium. Closed-loop insulin delivery
in suboptimally controlled type 1 diabetes: a
multicentre, 12-week randomised trial. Lancet
2018;392:1321–1329
209. Ekhlaspour L, Forlenza GP, Chernavvsky D,
et al. Closed loop control in adolescents and
children during winter sports: Use of the Tandem
Control-IQ AP system. Pediatr Diabetes 2019;
20:759–768
210. Buckingham BA, Christiansen MP, Forlenza
GP, et al. Performance of the Omnipod personalized
model predictive control algorithm with meal bolus
challenges in adults with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes
Technol Ther 2018;20:585–595
211. Renard E, Tubiana-RuﬁN, Bonnemaison-
Gilbert E, et al. Closed-loop driven by control-to-
range
algorithm
outperforms
threshold-low-
glucose-suspend insulin delivery on glucose
control albeit not on nocturnal hypoglycaemia in
prepubertal patients with type 1 diabetes in a
supervised hotel setting. Diabetes Obes Metab
2019;21:183–187
212. Forlenza GP, Ekhlaspour L, Breton M, et al.
Successful at-home use of the Tandem Control-
IQ artiﬁcial pancreas system in young children
during a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes
Technol Ther 2019;21:159–169
213. Anderson SM, Buckingham BA, Breton MD,
et al. Hybrid closed-loop control is safe and
effective for people with type 1 diabetes who are
at moderate to high risk for hypoglycemia.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:356–363
214. Forlenza GP, Pinhas-Hamiel O, Liljenquist
DR, et al. Safety evaluation of the MiniMed 670G
system in children 7-13 years of age with type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:11–19
215. Karageorgiou V, Papaioannou TG, Bellos I,
et al. Effectiveness of artiﬁcial pancreas in the
non-adult population: a systematic review and
network meta-analysis. Metabolism 2019;90:20–30
216. Wadwa RP, Reed ZW, Buckingham BA,
et al.; PEDAP Trial Study Group. Trial of hybrid
closed-loop control in young children with type 1
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2023;388:991–1001
217. McVean J, Forlenza GP, Beck RW, et al.;
CLVer Study Group. Effect of tight glycemic
control on pancreatic beta cell function in newly
diagnosed pediatric type 1 diabetes: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA 2023;329:980–989
218. Cordero TL, Dai Z, Arrieta A, et al. Glycemic
outcomes during early use of the MiniMed 780G
advanced hybrid closed-loop system with Guardian
4 sensor. Diabetes Technol Ther 2023;25:652–658
219. Kaur H, Schneider N, Pyle L, Campbell K,
Akturk HK, Shah VN. Efﬁcacy of hybrid closed-
loop system in adults with type 1 diabetes and
gastroparesis. Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:
736–739
220. Brown SA, Kovatchev BP, Raghinaru D,
et al.; iDCL Trial Research Group. Six-month
randomized, multicenter trial of closed-loop
control in type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;
381:1707–1717
221. Sherr JL, Buckingham BA, Forlenza GP, et al.
Safety and performance of the Omnipod hybrid
closed-loop system in adults, adolescents, and
children with type 1 diabetes over 5 days under
free-living conditions. Diabetes Technol Ther
2020;22:174–184
222. Lal RA, Basina M, Maahs DM, Hood K,
Buckingham B, Wilson DM. One year clinical
experience of the ﬁrst commercial hybrid closed-
loop system. Diabetes Care 2019;42:2190–2196
223. Kovatchev B, Anderson SM, Raghinaru D,
et al.; iDCL Study Group. Randomized controlled
trial of mobile closed-loop control. Diabetes Care
2020;43:607–615
224. Russell SJ, Beck RW, Damiano ER, et al.;
Bionic Pancreas Research Group. Multicenter,
randomized trial of a bionic pancreas in type 1
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2022;387:1161–1172
225. Messer LH, Buckingham BA, Cogen F, et al.
Positive impact of the bionic pancreas on
diabetes control in youth 6-17 years old with
type 1 diabetes: a multicenter randomized trial.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:712–725
226. Castellanos LE, Russell SJ, Damiano ER,
et al.; Bionic Pancreas Research Group. The
insulin-only bionic pancreas improves glycemic
control in non-hispanic white and minority adults
and children with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care
2023;46:1185–1190
227. Beck RW, Russell SJ, Damiano ER, et al. A
multicenter randomized trial evaluating fast-
acting insulin aspart in the bionic pancreas in
adults with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol
Ther 2022;24:681–696
228. Kruger D, Kass A, Lonier J, et al. A
multicenter randomized trial evaluating the
insulin-only conﬁguration of the bionic pancreas
in adults with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol
Ther 2022;24:697–711
229. Lynch J, Kanapka LG, Russell SJ, et al. The
insulin-only bionic pancreas pivotal trial extension
study: a multi-center single-arm evaluation of the
insulin-only conﬁguration of the bionic pancreas
in adults and youth with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes
Technol Ther 2022;24:726–736
230. Ekhlaspour L, Raghinaru D, Forlenza GP,
et al. Outcomes in pump- and CGM-baseline use
subgroups in the International Diabetes Closed-
Loop Trial. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2023;17:935–942
231. Sherr JL, Cengiz E, Palerm CC, et al.
Reduced hypoglycemia and increased time in
target using closed-loop insulin delivery during
nights with or without antecedent afternoon
exercise in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2013;
36:2909–2914
232. Weissberg-Benchell J, Hessler D, Polonsky
WH, Fisher L. Psychosocial impact of the bionic
pancreas during summer camp. J Diabetes Sci
Technol 2016;10:840–844
233. Troncone A, Bonfanti R, Iafusco D, et al.
Evaluating the experience of children with type 1
diabetes and their parents taking part in an
artiﬁcial pancreas clinical trial over multiple days
in a diabetes camp setting. Diabetes Care 2016;
39:2158–2164
234. Barnard KD, Wysocki T, Allen JM, et al.
Closing the loop overnight at home setting:
psychosocial impact for adolescents with type 1
diabetes and their parents. BMJ Open Diabetes
Res Care 2014;2:e000025
235. Carlson AL, Sherr JL, Shulman DI, et al.
Safety and glycemic outcomes during the MiniMed
advanced hybrid closed-loop system pivotal trial in
adolescents and adults with type 1 diabetes.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:178–189
236. Weissberg-Benchell J, Vesco AT, Shapiro J,
et al. Psychosocial impact of the insulin-only iLet
bionic pancreas for adults, youth, and caregivers
of youth with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol
Ther 2023;25:705–717
237. Amigo J, Ortiz-Zu~niga A, de Urbina AMO,
et al. Switching from treatment with sensor
augmented pump to hybrid closed loop system in
type 1 diabetes: impact on glycemic control and
neuropsychological tests in the real world.
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2023;201:110730
238. Chico A, Navas de Solıs S, Lainez M, Rius F,
Cuesta M. Efﬁcacy, safety, and satisfaction with
the Accu-Chek Insight with Diabeloop closed-
loop system in subjects with type 1 diabetes: a
multicenter real-world study. Diabetes Technol
Ther 2023;25:242–249
239. Benhamou PY, Adenis A, Lebbad H, et al.
One-year real-world performance of the DBLG1
closed-loop system: data from 3706 adult users
with type 1 diabetes in Germany. Diabetes Obes
Metab 2023;25:1607–1613
240. Benhamou PY, Adenis A, Lablanche S, et al.
First generation of a modular interoperable closed-
loop system for automated insulin delivery in
patients with type 1 diabetes: lessons from trials
and real-life data. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2023;
17:1433–1439
241. Beck RW, Kanapka LG, Breton MD, et al. A
meta-analysis of randomized trial outcomes for
the t:slim X2 insulin pump with Control-IQ
technology in youth and adults from age 2 to 72.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2023;25:329–342
242. Grassi B, Gomez AM, Calliari LE, et al. Real-
world
performance
of
the
MiniMed
780G
advanced hybrid closed loop system in Latin
America: substantial improvement in glycaemic
control with each technology iteration of the
MiniMed automated insulin delivery system.
Diabetes Obes Metab 2023;25:1688–1697
243. Forlenza GP, Carlson AL, Galindo RJ, et al.
Real-world evidence supporting Tandem Control-
IQ hybrid closed-loop success in the Medicare
and Medicaid type 1 and type 2 diabetes
populations. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:
814–823
244. Szmuilowicz ED, Levy CJ, Buschur EO,
Polsky S. Expert guidance on off-label use of
hybrid
closed-loop
therapy
in
pregnancies
complicated by diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther
2023;25:363–373
245. Grunberger
G,
Sze
D,
Ermakova
A,
Sieradzan R, Oliveria T, Miller EM. Treatment
intensiﬁcation with insulin pumps and other
technologies in patients with type 2 diabetes:
S142
Diabetes Technology
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

results of a physician survey in the United States.
Clin Diabetes 2020;38:47–55
246. Grunberger G, Rosenfeld CR, Bode BW,
et al. Effectiveness of V-Go for patients with
type 2 diabetes in a real-world setting: a prospective
observational study. Drugs Real World Outcomes
2020;7:31–40
247. Layne JE, Parkin CG, Zisser H. Efﬁcacy of a
tubeless patch pump in patients with type 2
diabetes previously treated with multiple daily
injections. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2017;11:178–
179
248. Raval AD, Nguyen MH, Zhou S, Grabner M,
Barron J, Quimbo R. Effect of V-Go versus
multiple daily injections on glycemic control,
insulin use, and diabetes medication costs
among individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus. J
Manag Care Spec Pharm. 5 July 2019 (Epub
ahead of print). DOI: 10.18553/jmcp.2019.18438
249. Leahy JJL, Aleppo G, Fonseca VA, et al.
Optimizing postprandial glucose management in
adults with insulin-requiring diabetes: report and
recommendations. J Endocr Soc 2019;3:1942–1957
250. Reznik Y, Cohen O, Aronson R, et al.;
OpT2mise Study Group. Insulin pump treatment
compared with multiple daily injections for
treatment of type 2 diabetes (OpT2mise): a
randomised open-label controlled trial. Lancet
2014;384:1265–1272
251. Carlson AL, Huyett LM, Jantz J, Chang A,
Vienneau T, Ly TT. Improved glycemic control in
3,592 adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus
initiating a tubeless insulin management system.
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2021;174:108735
252. Davis GM, Peters AL, Bode BW, et al. Safety
and efﬁcacy of the Omnipod 5 automated insulin
delivery system in adults with type 2 diabetes:
from injections to hybrid closed-loop therapy.
Diabetes Care 2023;46:742–750
253. Winter A, Lintner M, Knezevich E. V-Go
insulin delivery system versus multiple daily
insulin injections for patients with uncontrolled
type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Diabetes Sci Technol
2015;9:1111–1116
254. Bergenstal RM, Peyrot M, Dreon DM, et al.;
Calibra Study Group. Implementation of basal-
bolus therapy in type 2 diabetes: a randomized
controlled trial comparing bolus insulin delivery
using an insulin patch with an insulin pen.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:273–285
255. Lewis D. History and perspective on DIY
closed looping. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2019;13:
790–793
256. Hng TM, Burren D. Appearance of do-it-
yourself closed-loop systems to manage type 1
diabetes. Intern Med J 2018;48:1400–1404
257. Petruzelkova L, Soupal J, Plasova V, et al.
Excellent glycemic control maintained by open-
source hybrid closed-loop AndroidAPS during
and after sustained physical activity. Diabetes
Technol Ther 2018;20:744–750
258. Kesavadev J, Srinivasan S, Saboo B, Krishna
B M, Krishnan G. The do-it-yourself artiﬁcial
pancreas: a comprehensive review. Diabetes
Ther 2020;11:1217–1235
259. Braune K, Lal RA, Petruzelkova L, et al.;
OPEN
International
Healthcare
Professional
Network and OPEN Legal Advisory Group. Open-
source automated insulin delivery: international
consensus statement and practical guidance
for health-care professionals. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol 2022;10:58–74
260. Burnside MJ, Lewis DM, Crocket HR, et al.
Open-source automated insulin delivery in type 1
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2022;387:869–881
261. Burnside MJ, Lewis DM, Crocket HR, et al.
Extended use of an open-source automated
insulin delivery system in children and adults
with type 1 diabetes: the 24-week continuation
phase following the CREATE randomized con-
trolled trial. Diabetes Technol Ther 2023;25:250–
259
262. Phillip M, Bergenstal RM, Close KL, et al.
The digital/virtual diabetes clinic: the future is
now—recommendations from an international
panel on diabetes digital technologies introduction.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2021;23:146–154
263. Fleming GA, Petrie JR, Bergenstal RM, Holl
RW, Peters AL, Heinemann L. Diabetes digital
app technology:
beneﬁts,
challenges,
and
recommendations. A consensus report by the
European Association for the Study of Diabetes
(EASD) and the American Diabetes Association
(ADA) Diabetes Technology Working Group.
Diabetes Care 2020;43:250–260
264. Wong JC, Izadi Z, Schroeder S, et al. A pilot
study of use of a software platform for the
collection,
integration,
and
visualization
of
diabetes device data by health care providers in a
multidisciplinary
pediatric
setting.
Diabetes
Technol Ther 2018;20:806–816
265. Chao DY, Lin TM, Ma WY. Enhanced self-
efﬁcacy and behavioral changes among patients
with
diabetes:
cloud-based
mobile
health
platform and mobile app service. JMIR Diabetes
2019;4:e11017
266. Sepah SC, Jiang L, Peters AL.Translating the
diabetes prevention program into an online
social network: validation against CDC standards.
Diabetes Educ 2014;40:435–443
267. Kaufman N, Ferrin C, Sugrue D. Using
digital health technology to prevent and treat
diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21(S1):
S79–S94
268. €Oberg U, Isaksson U, Jutterstr€om L, Orre CJ,
H€ornsten Å. Perceptions of persons with type 2
diabetes treated in Swedish primary health care:
qualitative study on using eHealth services for
self-management support. JMIR Diabetes 2018;
3:e7
269. Bollyky JB, Bravata D,Yang J,Williamson M,
Schneider J. Remote lifestyle coaching plus a
connected glucose meter with certiﬁed diabetes
educator support improves glucose and weight
loss for people with type 2 diabetes. J Diabetes
Res 2018;2018:3961730
270. Wilhide Iii CC, Peeples MM, Anthony
Kouyate RC. Evidence-based mHealth chronic
disease mobile app intervention design: de-
velopment of a framework. JMIR Res Protoc
2016;5:e25
271. Dixon RF, Zisser H, Layne JE, et al. A virtual
type 2 diabetes clinic using continuous glucose
monitoring and endocrinology visits. J Diabetes
Sci Technol 2020;14:908–911
272. Yang Y, Lee EY, Kim HS, Lee SH, Yoon KH,
Cho JH. Effect of a mobile phone-based glucose-
monitoring and feedback system for type 2
diabetes management in multiple primary care
clinic settings: cluster randomized controlled
trial. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020;8:e16266
273. Levine BJ, Close KL, Gabbay RA. Reviewing
U.S.
connected
diabetes
care:
the
newest
member of the team. Diabetes Technol Ther
2020;22:1–9
274. McGill
DE,
Volkening
LK,
Butler
DA,
Wasserman RM, Anderson BJ, Laffel LM. Text-
message
responsiveness
to
blood
glucose
monitoring reminders is associated with HbA1c
beneﬁt in teenagers with type 1 diabetes. Diabet
Med 2019;36:600–605
275. Shen Y,Wang F, Zhang X, et al. Effectiveness
of
internet-based
interventions
on
glycemic
control in patients with type 2 diabetes: meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Med
Internet Res 2018;20:e172
276. Umpierrez
GE,
Klonoff
DC.
Diabetes
technology update: use of insulin pumps and
continuous glucose monitoring in the hospital.
Diabetes Care 2018;41:1579–1589
277. Yeh T, Yeung M, Mendelsohn Curanaj FA.
Managing patients with insulin pumps and
continuous glucose monitors in the hospital: to
wear or not to wear. Curr Diab Rep 2021;21:7
278. Galindo RJ, Umpierrez GE, Rushakoff RJ,
et al. Continuous glucose monitors and auto-
mated insulin dosing systems in the hospital
consensus guideline. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2020;
14:1035–1064
279. Houlden RL, Moore S. In-hospital manage-
ment of adults using insulin pump therapy. Can
J Diabetes 2014;38:126–133
280. Avari P, Lumb A, Flanagan D, et al. Insulin
pumps and hybrid close loop systems within
hospital: a scoping review and practical guidance
from the Joint British Diabetes Societies for
Inpatient Care. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2023;17:
625–634
281. McCall AL, Lieb DC, Gianchandani R, et al.
Management of individuals with diabetes at high
risk for hypoglycemia: an Endocrine Society
Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2023;108:529–562
282. Tian T, Aaron RE, Yeung AM, et al. Use of
continuous glucose monitors in the hospital: the
Diabetes Technology Society hospital meeting
report 2023. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2023;17:
1392–1418
283. U.S.
Food
and
Drug
Administration.
Enforcement Policy for Non-Invasive Remote
Monitoring Devices Used to Support Patient
Monitoring During the Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19) Public Health Emergency (Revised),
2020. Accessed 21 September 2023. Available
from https://www.fda.gov/media/136290/download
284. Davis GM, Faulds E, Walker T, et al. Remote
continuous glucose monitoring with a com-
puterized insulin infusion protocol for critically ill
patients in a COVID-19 medical ICU: proof of
concept. Diabetes Care 2021;44:1055–1058
285. Sadhu
AR,
Serrano
IA,
Xu
J,
et al.
Continuous glucose monitoring in critically ill
patients with COVID-19: results of an emergent
pilot study. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2020;14:
1065–1073
286. Agarwal S, Mathew J, Davis GM, et al.
Continuous glucose monitoring in the intensive
care
unit
during
the
COVID-19
pandemic.
Diabetes Care 2021;44:847–849
287. Galindo RJ, Aleppo G, Klonoff DC, et al.
Implementation of continuous glucose monitoring
in the hospital: emergent considerations for
remote glucose monitoring during the COVID-19
pandemic. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2020;14:822–
832
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diabetes Technology
S143
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

288. Ushigome E, Yamazaki M, Hamaguchi M,
et al. Usefulness and safety of remote continuous
glucose monitoring for a severe COVID-19 patient
with diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2021;23:
78–80
289. Korytkowski MT, Muniyappa R, Antinori-
Lent K, et al. Management of hyperglycemia in
hospitalized adult patients in non-critical care
settings: an Endocrine Society clinical practice
guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2022;107:
2101–2128
290. Longo RR, Elias H, Khan M, Seley JJ. Use
and accuracy of inpatient CGM during the
COVID-19 pandemic: an observational study of
general medicine and ICU patients. J Diabetes Sci
Technol 2022;16:1136–1143
291. Davis GM, Spanakis EK, Migdal AL, et al.
Accuracy of Dexcom G6 continuous glucose
monitoring in non-critically ill hospitalized patients
with diabetes. Diabetes Care 2021;44:1641–1646
292. Baker
M,
Musselman
ME,
Rogers
R,
Hellman R. Practical implementation of remote
continuous glucose monitoring in hospitalized
patients with diabetes. Am J Health Syst Pharm
2022;79:452–458
293. Wright JJ, Williams AJ, Friedman SB, et al.
Accuracy of continuous glucose monitors for
inpatient diabetes management. J Diabetes Sci
Technol 2022;17:19322968221076562
294. Spanakis EK, Urrutia A, Galindo RJ, et al.
Continuous glucose monitoring-guided insulin
administration
in
hospitalized patients
with
diabetes: a randomized clinical trial. Diabetes
Care 2022;45:2369–2375
295. Singh LG, Satyarengga M, Marcano I, et al.
Reducing inpatient hypoglycemia in the general
wards using real-time continuous glucose
monitoring: the glucose telemetry system, a
randomized clinical trial. Diabetes Care 2020;
43:2736–2743
296. Fortmann AL, Spierling Bagsic SR, Talavera
L, et al. Glucose as the ﬁfth vital sign: a
randomized controlled trial of continuous glucose
monitoring in a non-ICU hospital setting. Diabetes
Care 2020;43:2873–2877
297. Pelkey MN, Boyle ME, Long A, Castro JC,
Cook CB, Thompson B. Hybrid closed-loop insulin
pump technology can be safely used in the
inpatient setting. Endocr Pract 2023;29:24–28
298. Madhun NZ, Galindo RJ, Donato J, et al.
Attitudes and behaviors with diabetes technology
use in the hospital: multicenter survey study in
the United States. Diabetes Technol Ther 2023;
25:39–49
299. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Self-
Monitoring Blood Glucose Test Systems for Over-
the-Counter Use. Guidance for Industry and Food
and Drug Administration Staff, September 2020.
Accessed 21 September 2023. Available from
https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/
search-fda-guidance-documents/self-monitoring-
blood-glucose-test-systems-over-counter-use
300. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Blood
Glucose Monitoring Test Systems for Prescription
Point-of-Care Use: Guidance for Industry and
Food and Drug Administration Staff, September
2020. Accessed 21 September 2023. Available from
https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-
fda-guidance-documents/blood-glucose-monitoring
-test-systems-prescription-point-care-use
301. Parkes JL, Slatin SL, Pardo S, Ginsberg BH. A
new consensus error grid to evaluate the clinical
signiﬁcance of inaccuracies in the measurement
of blood glucose. Diabetes Care 2000;23:1143–
1148
S144
Diabetes Technology
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

8. Obesity and Weight Management
for the Prevention and Treatment
of Type 2 Diabetes: Standards of
Care in Diabetes–2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S145–S157 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S008
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes”
includes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to
provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guide-
lines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional
Practice Committee, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for
updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a
detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the
evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full
list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction
and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are
invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
Obesity is a chronic, often relapsing disease with numerous metabolic, physical, and
psychosocial complications, including a substantially increased risk for type 2 diabetes
(1). There is strong and consistent evidence that obesity management can delay the
progression from prediabetes to type 2 diabetes (2–6) and is highly beneﬁcial in treat-
ing type 2 diabetes (7–17). In people with type 2 diabetes and overweight or obesity,
modest weight loss improves glycemia and reduces the need for glucose-lowering
medications (7–9), and larger weight loss substantially reduces A1C and fasting glu-
cose and may promote sustained diabetes remission (11,18–22). Metabolic surgery,
which induces on average >20% of body weight loss, strongly improves glycemia and
often leads to remission of diabetes, improved quality of life, improved cardiovascular
outcomes, and reduced mortality (23,24). Several modalities, including intensive be-
havioral and lifestyle counseling, obesity pharmacotherapy, and metabolic surgery,
may aid in achieving and maintaining meaningful weight loss and reducing obesity-
associated health risks. This section aims to provide evidence-based recommendations
for obesity management, including behavioral, pharmacologic, and surgical interven-
tions, in people with, or at high risk of, type 2 diabetes. Additional considerations re-
garding weight management in older individuals and children can be found in Section
13, “Older Adults,” and Section 14, “Children and Adolescents,” respectively.
ASSESSMENT AND MONITORING OF THE INDIVIDUAL WITH
OVERWEIGHT AND OBESITY
Recommendations
8.1 Use person-centered, nonjudgmental language that fosters collaboration be-
tween individuals and health care professionals, including person-ﬁrst language
(e.g., “person with obesity” rather than “obese person” and “person with diabetes”
rather than “diabetic person”). E
*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
This section has received endorsement from The
Obesity Society.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee. 8. Obesity and
weight management for the prevention and
treatment of type 2 diabetes: Standards of Care
in Diabetes—2024. Diabetes Care 2024;47
(Suppl. 1):S145–S157
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
8. OBESITY AND WEIGHT MANAGEMENT
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
S145
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

8.2a To support the diagnosis of
obesity, measure height and weight
to calculate BMI and perform addi-
tional measurements of body fat distri-
bution, like waist circumference, waist-
to-hip ratio, and/or waist-to-height
ratio. E
8.2b Monitor obesity-related anthropo-
metric measurements at least annually
to inform treatment considerations. E
8.3 Accommodations should be made
to provide privacy during anthropo-
metric measurements. E
8.4 In people with type 2 diabetes and
overweight or obesity, weight manage-
ment should represent a primary goal
of treatment along with glycemic man-
agement. A
8.5 People with diabetes and over-
weight or obesity may beneﬁt from
any magnitude of weight loss. Weight
loss of 3–7% of baseline weight im-
proves glycemia and other intermediate
cardiovascular risk factors. A Sustained
loss of >10% of body weight usually
confers greater beneﬁts, including dis-
ease-modifying effects and possible re-
mission of type 2 diabetes, and may
improve long-term cardiovascular out-
comes and mortality. B
8.6
Individualize
initial
treatment
approaches for obesity (i.e., lifestyle
and nutritional therapy, pharmaco-
logic agents, or metabolic surgery) A
based on the person’s medical his-
tory, life circumstances, preferences,
and motivation. C Consider combin-
ing treatment approaches if appropri-
ate. E
Obesity is deﬁned by the World Health
Organization as an abnormal or excessive
fat accumulation that presents a risk to
health (25). BMI (calculated as weight
in kilograms divided by the square of
height in meters [kg/m2]) has been used
widely to diagnose and stage obesity
(overweight: BMI 25–29.9 kg/m2; obesity
class I: BMI 30–34.9 kg/m2; obesity class
II: BMI 35–39.9 kg/m2; obesity class III:
BMI $40 kg/m2); however, BMI should
not be relied on as a sole diagnostic and
staging tool (19). Despite its ease of mea-
surement, BMI is at most an imperfect
measure of adipose tissue mass and does
not measure adipose tissue distribution
or function, nor does it factor in the pres-
ence of weight-related health or well-being
consequences (26,27). BMI is especially
prone to misclassiﬁcation in individuals
who are very muscular or frail, as well as
in populations with different body com-
position and cardiometabolic risk (28). A
diagnosis of obesity should be made
based on an overall assessment of the in-
dividual’s adipose tissue mass (BMI can
be used as a general guidance), distribution
(using other anthropometric measurements
like waist circumference, waist-to-hip cir-
cumference ratio, or waist-to-height
ratio), or function and, importantly, the
presence of associated health or well-be-
ing consequences: metabolic, physical, or
psychological/well-being (29).
Obesity is a key pathophysiologic driver
of diabetes, other cardiovascular risk fac-
tors (e.g., hypertension, hyperlipidemia,
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, and in-
ﬂammatory state), and ultimately cardio-
vascular and kidney disease (30). Diabetes
can further exacerbate obesity, setting up
a vicious cycle that contributes to disease
progression and occurrence of microvascu-
lar and macrovascular complications. As
such, treatment goals for both glycemia
and weight are recommended in people
with diabetes to address both hyperglyce-
mia and its underlying pathophysiologic
driver (obesity) and therefore beneﬁt the
person holistically.
A person-centered communication style
that uses inclusive and nonjudgmental lan-
guage and active listening to elicit individ-
ual preferences and beliefs and assesses
potential barriers to care should be used
to optimize health outcomes and health-
related quality of life. Use person-ﬁrst lan-
guage (e.g., “person with obesity” rather
than “obese person”) to avoid deﬁning
people by their condition (26,31,32).
Measurement of weight and height (to
calculate BMI) and other anthropometric
measurements should be performed at
least annually to aid the diagnosis ofobesity
and to monitor its progression and re-
sponse to treatment (33). Clinical consider-
ations, such as the presence of comorbid
heart failure or unexplained weight change,
may warrant more frequent evaluation
(34,35). If such measurements are ques-
tioned or declined by the individual, the
practitioner should be mindful of possible
prior stigmatizing experiences and query
for concerns, and the value of monitoring
should be explained as a part of the medi-
cal evaluation process that helps to inform
treatment decisions (36,37). Accommoda-
tions should be made to ensure privacy
during weighing and other anthropometric
measurements, particularly for those indi-
viduals who report or exhibit a high level
of disease-related distress or dissatisfaction.
Anthropometric measurements should be
performed and reported nonjudgmentally;
such information should be regarded as
sensitive health information.
Health care professionals should advise
individuals with overweight or obesity and
those with increasing weight trajectories
that, in general, greater fat accumulation
increases the risk of diabetes, cardiovascu-
lar disease, and all-cause mortality and has
multiple adverse health and quality of life
consequences. Health care professionals
should assess readiness to engage in be-
havioral changes for weight loss and jointly
determine behavioral and weight loss
goals
and
individualized
intervention
strategies using shared decision-making
(38). Strategies may include nutrition and
dietary changes, physical activity and ex-
ercise, behavioral counseling, pharmaco-
therapy, medical devices, and metabolic
surgery. The initial and subsequent thera-
peutic choice should be individualized
based on the person’s medical history, life
circumstances, preferences, and motiva-
tion (39). Combination treatment ap-
proaches may be appropriate in higher-
risk individuals.
Among people with type 2 diabetes
and overweight or obesity who have in-
adequate glycemic, blood pressure, and
lipid management and/or other obesity-
related metabolic complications, modest
and sustained weight loss (3–7% of body
weight) improves glycemia, blood pres-
sure, and lipids and may reduce the need
for disease-speciﬁc medications (7–9,40). In
people at risk, 3–7% weight loss reduces
progression to
diabetes
(2,7,8,41,42).
Greater weight loss may produce addi-
tional beneﬁts (20,21). Mounting data
have shown that >10% body weight loss
usually confers greater beneﬁts on glyce-
mia and possibly diabetes remission and
improves other metabolic comorbidities,
including cardiovascular outcomes, nonal-
coholic steatohepatitis, nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease, adipose tissue inﬂamma-
tion, and sleep apnea, as well as physical
comorbidities and quality of life (6,20,
21,30,41,43–52).
With the increasing availability of more
effective treatments, individuals with dia-
betes and overweight or obesity should
be informed of the potential beneﬁts of
both modest and more substantial weight
S146
Obesity and Weight Management for Type 2 Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

loss and guided in the range of available
treatment options, as discussed in the
sections below. Shared decision-making
should be used when counseling on
behavioral changes, intervention choices,
and weight management goals.
NUTRITION, PHYSICAL ACTIVITY,
AND BEHAVIORAL THERAPY
Recommendations
8.7 Nutrition, physical activity, and
behavioral therapy to achieve and
maintain $5% weight loss are rec-
ommended for people with type 2
diabetes and overweight or obesity. B
8.8a Interventions including high fre-
quency of counseling ($16 sessions
in 6 months) with focus on nutrition
changes, physical activity, and be-
havioral
strategies
to
achieve
a
500–750 kcal/day energy deﬁcit have
been shown to be beneﬁcial for weight
loss and should be considered when
available. A
8.8b Consider structured programs de-
livering behavioral counseling (face-to-
face or remote) to address barriers to
access. E
8.9 Nutrition recommendations should
be individualized to the person’s pref-
erences and nutritional needs. Use nu-
tritional plans that create an energy
deﬁcit, regardless of macronutrient
composition, to achieve weight loss. A
8.10 When developing a plan of care,
consider systemic, structural, and so-
cioeconomic factors that may impact
nutrition patterns and food choices,
such as food insecurity and hunger,
access to healthful food options, cul-
tural circumstances, and other social
determinants of health. C
8.11a For those who achieve weight
loss goals, long-term ($1 year) weight
maintenance programs are recom-
mended, when available. Effective pro-
grams provide monthly contact and
support, recommend ongoing monitor-
ing of body weight (weekly or more
frequently) and other self-monitoring
strategies, and encourage regular phys-
ical activity (200–300 min/week). A
8.11b For those who achieve weight
loss goals, continue to monitor prog-
ress periodically, provide ongoing sup-
port, and recommend continuing
adopted interventions to maintain
goals long term. E
8.12 When short-term nutrition inter-
vention
using
structured,
very-low-
calorie meals (800–1,000 kcal/day) is
considered, it should be prescribed to
carefully selected individuals by trained
practitioners in medical settings with
close monitoring. Long-term, compre-
hensive weight maintenance strategies
and counseling should be integrated
to maintain weight loss. B
8.13 Nutritional supplements have not
been shown to be effective for weight
loss and are not recommended. A
For a more detailed discussion of life-
style management approaches and rec-
ommendations, see Section 5, “Facilitating
Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
to Improve Health Outcomes.” For a de-
tailed discussion of nutrition interventions,
please also refer to “Nutrition Therapy for
Adults With Diabetes or Pre-diabetes: A
Consensus Report” (53).
Look AHEAD Trial
Although the Action for Health in Diabetes
(Look AHEAD) trial did not show that the
intensive lifestyle intervention reduced
cardiovascular events in adults with type 2
diabetes and overweight or obesity (41), it
did conﬁrm the feasibility of achieving and
maintaining long-term weight loss in peo-
ple with type 2 diabetes. In the intensive
lifestyle intervention group, mean weight
loss was 4.7% at 8 years (42). Approxi-
mately 50% of intensive lifestyle interven-
tion participants lost and maintained $5%
of their initial body weight, and 27% lost
and maintained $10% of their initial body
weight at 8 years (42). Participants as-
signed to the intensive lifestyle group re-
quired fewer glucose-, blood pressure-,
and lipid-lowering medications than those
randomly assigned to standard care. Sec-
ondary analyses of the Look AHEAD trial
and other large cardiovascular outcome
studies document additional weight loss
beneﬁts in people with type 2 diabetes, in-
cluding improved mobility, physical and
sexual function, and health-related quality
of life (34). Moreover, several subgroups
had improved cardiovascular outcomes,
including those who achieved >10%
weight loss (43).
Behavioral Interventions
Signiﬁcant weight loss can be attained
with lifestyle programs that achieve a
500–750 kcal/day energy deﬁcit, which
in most cases is approximately 1,200–
1,500 kcal/day for women and 1,500–
1,800 kcal/day for men, adjusted for the
individual’s baseline body weight. Clinical
beneﬁts typically begin upon achieving 5%
weight loss (19,54), and the beneﬁts of
weight loss are progressive; more inten-
sive weight loss goals (>7%, >10%,
>15%, etc.) may be pursued to achieve
further health improvements if the indi-
vidual is motivated and more intensive
goals can be feasibly and safely attained.
Nutrition interventions may differ by
macronutrient goals and food choices as
long as they create the necessary energy
deﬁcit to promote weight loss (19,55–57).
Using meal replacement plans prescribed
by trained practitioners, with close moni-
toring, can be beneﬁcial. Within the inten-
sive lifestyle intervention group of the
Look AHEAD trial, for example, the use of
a partial meal replacement plan was asso-
ciated with improvements in nutrition
quality and weight loss (54), and improve-
ment in cardiovascular risk factors (41). In
a systematic review and meta-analysis, ef-
ﬁcacy and safety of meal replacements
(partial or total meal replacement) as com-
pared with conventional diets showed im-
provements in A1C, FBG, body weight,
and BMI (58). The nutrition choice should
be based on the individual’s health status
and preferences, including a determina-
tion of food availability and other cultural
circumstances that could affect nutrition
patterns (59).
Proven intensive behavioral interventions
included $16 sessions during an initial
6 months and focus on nutritional changes,
physical activity, and behavioral strategies
to achieve an 500–750 kcal/day energy
deﬁcit. Such interventions should be pro-
vided by trained individuals and can be
conducted in either individual or group
sessions (54). Assessing a person’s moti-
vation level, life circumstances, and will-
ingness to implement behavioral changes
to achieve weight loss should be consid-
ered along with medical status when
such interventions are recommended
and initiated (38,60). If such intensive be-
havioral interventions are not available or
accessible, structured programs deliver-
ing behavioral counseling (face-to-face or
remote) can be considered; however,
their effectiveness varies (61,62).
People with type 2 diabetes and over-
weight or obesity who have lost weight
should be offered long-term ($1 year)
diabetesjournals.org/care
Obesity and Weight Management for Type 2 Diabetes
S147
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

comprehensive weight loss maintenance
programs that provide at least monthly
contact with trained individuals and focus
on ongoing monitoring of body weight
(weekly or more frequently) and/or other
self-monitoring strategies such as tracking
intake, steps, etc.; continued focus on nu-
trition and behavioral changes; and par-
ticipation in high levels of physical activity
(200–300 min/week) (63,64). Some com-
mercial and proprietary weight loss pro-
grams have shown promising weight loss
results; however, results vary across these
programs, most lack evidence of effec-
tiveness, many do not satisfy guideline
recommendations, and some promote
unscientiﬁc and possibly dangerous prac-
tices (65,66).
Structured, very-low-calorie meals, typ-
ically 800–1,000 kcal/day, utilizing high-
protein foods and meal replacement
products, may increase the pace and/or
magnitude of initial weight loss and glyce-
mic improvements compared with stan-
dard behavioral interventions (20,21).
However, such an intensive nutritional in-
tervention should be provided only by
trained practitioners in medical settings
with close ongoing monitoring and in-
tegration with behavioral support and
counseling, and only for short term (gen-
erally up to 3 months). Furthermore, due
to the high risk of complications (electro-
lyte abnormalities, severe fatigue, cardiac
arrhythmias, etc.), such intensive inter-
vention should be prescribed only to
carefully selected individuals, such as
those requiring weight loss and/or gly-
cemic management before a needed
surgery, if the beneﬁts exceed the po-
tential risks (67–69). As weight recur-
rence is common, such interventions
should include long-term, comprehen-
sive weight maintenance strategies and
counseling to maintain weight loss and be-
havioral changes (70,71).
Despite widespread marketing and ex-
orbitant claims, there is no clear evidence
that nutrition supplements (such as herbs
and botanicals, high-dose vitamins and
minerals, amino acids, enzymes, antioxi-
dants, etc.) are effective for obesity man-
agement or weight loss (72–75). Several
large systematic reviews show that most
trials evaluating nutrition supplements
for weight loss are of low quality and at
high risk for bias. High-quality published
studies show little or no weight loss bene-
ﬁts. In contrast, vitamin/mineral (e.g., iron,
vitamin B12, vitamin D) supplementation
may be indicated in cases of documented
deﬁciency (76), and protein supplements
may be indicated as adjuncts to medically
supervised weight loss therapies (77,78).
Health disparities adversely affect peo-
ple who have systematically experienced
greater obstacles to health based on their
race or ethnicity, socioeconomic status,
gender, disability, or other factors. Over-
whelming research shows that these dis-
parities may signiﬁcantly affect health
outcomes, including increasing the risk
for obesity, diabetes, and diabetes-related
complications. Health care professionals
should evaluate systemic, structural, and
socioeconomic factors that may impact
food choices, access to healthful foods,
and nutrition patterns; behavioral pat-
terns, such as neighborhood safety and
availability of safe outdoor spaces for
physical activity; environmental exposures;
access to health care; social contexts; and,
ultimately, diabetes risk and outcomes.
For a detailed discussion of social determi-
nants of health, refer to “Social Determi-
nants of Health: A Scientiﬁc Review” (79).
PHARMACOTHERAPY
Recommendations
8.14 Whenever possible, minimize
medications for comorbid conditions
that are associated with weight gain. E
8.15 When choosing glucose-lowering
medications for people with type 2
diabetes and overweight or obesity,
prioritize medications with beneﬁcial
effect on weight. B
8.16 Obesity pharmacotherapy should
be considered for people with diabetes
and overweight or obesity along with
lifestyle changes. Potential beneﬁts and
risks must be considered. A
8.17 In people with diabetes and over-
weight or obesity, the preferred phar-
macotherapy should be a glucagon-like
peptide 1 receptor agonist or dual glucose-
dependent insulinotropic polypeptide
and glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor
agonist with greater weight loss efﬁ-
cacy (i.e., semaglutide or tirzepatide),
especially considering their added
weight-independent beneﬁts (e.g.,
glycemic and cardiometabolic). A
8.18 To prevent therapeutic inertia,
for those not reaching goals, reevalu-
ate weight management therapies
and intensify treatment with addi-
tional approaches (e.g., metabolic
surgery, additional pharmacologic
agents, and structured lifestyle man-
agement programs). A
Glucose-Lowering Therapy
Numerous effective glucose-lowering medi-
cations are currently available. However, to
achieve both glycemic and weight manage-
ment goals for diabetes treatment, health
care professionals should prioritize the use
of glucose-lowering medications with a ben-
eﬁcial effect on weight. Agents associated
with clinically meaningful weight loss in-
clude glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) re-
ceptor agonists, dual glucose-dependent
insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) and GLP-1
receptor agonist (tirzepatide), sodium–
glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors, metfor-
min, and amylin mimetics. Dipeptidyl pepti-
dase 4 inhibitors, centrally acting dopamine
agonist (bromocriptine), a-glucosidase in-
hibitors, and bile acid sequestrants (colese-
velam) are considered weight neutral. In
contrast, insulin secretagogues (sulfonylur-
eas and meglitinides), thiazolidinediones,
and insulin are often associated with weight
gain (see Section 9, “Pharmacologic
Approaches to Glycemic Treatment”).
Concomitant Medications
Health care professionals should carefully
review the individual’s concomitant medi-
cations and, whenever possible, minimize
or provide alternatives for medications
that promote weight gain. Examples of
medications associated with weight gain
include antipsychotics (e.g., clozapine,
olanzapine, risperidone), some antide-
pressants (e.g., tricyclic antidepressants,
some selective serotonin reuptake inhibi-
tors, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors),
glucocorticoids, injectable progestins, some
anticonvulsants (e.g., gabapentin and pre-
gabalin), b-blockers, and possibly sedating
antihistamines and anticholinergics (80).
Approved Obesity Pharmacotherapy
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) has approved several medications for
weight management as adjuncts to reduced
calorie diet and increased physical activity
in individuals with a BMI $30 kg/m2 or
$27 kg/m2 with one or more obesity-
associated comorbid conditions (e.g., type 2
diabetes, hypertension, and/or dyslipide-
mia). Nearly all FDA-approved obesity
medications have been shown to improve
glycemia in people with type 2 diabetes
S148
Obesity and Weight Management for Type 2 Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

and delay progression to type 2 diabetes
in at-risk individuals (22), and some of
these agents (e.g., liraglutide and sema-
glutide) have an indication for glucose
lowering as well as weight management.
Phentermine and other older adrenergic
agents are approved for short-term treat-
ment (#12 weeks) (81), while all others
are approved for long-term treatment
(>12 weeks) (22) (Table 8.1). (Refer to
Section 14, “Children and Adolescents,”
for medications approved for adolescents
with obesity.) In addition, setmelanotide,
a melanocortin 4 receptor agonist, is ap-
proved for use in cases of rare genetic
mutations resulting in severe hyperphagia
and extreme obesity, such as leptin recep-
tor deﬁciency and proopiomelanocortin
deﬁciency.
In people with type 2 diabetes and
overweight or obesity, agents with both
glucose-lowering and weight loss ef-
fects are preferred (refer to Section 9,
“Pharmacologic Approaches to Diabetes
Treatment”), which include agents from
the GLP-1 receptor agonist class and the
dual GIP and GLP-1 receptor agonist
class. Should use of these medications
not result in achievement of weight
management goals, or if they are not tol-
erated or contraindicated, other obesity
treatment approaches should be consid-
ered. Two phase 3 trials have demon-
strated the potential for use of the dual
GIP and GLP-1 receptor agonist (tirzepa-
tide) for obesity (SURMOUNT-1, individuals
with obesity, and SURMOUNT-2, individuals
with obesity and type 2 diabetes) (82,83).
In the SURMOUNT-2 trial, tirzepatide re-
sulted in body weight loss of 9.6% and
11.6% more than placebo and A1C lower-
ing of 1.55% and 1.57% more than placebo
after 72 weeks of treatment with the 10
mg and 15 mg doses, respectively, with
adverse effects similar to those seen with
the GLP-1 receptor agonist class (83).
Health care professionals should be
knowledgeable about the beneﬁts, dosing,
and risks for each treatment option to bal-
ance the potential beneﬁts of successful
weight loss against the potential risks for
each individual. The high risk and preva-
lence of cardiovascular disease in people
with diabetes has to be balanced against
the lack of long-term cardiovascular out-
comes trial data for agents like naltrexone-
bupropion and phentermine-topiramate.
All these medications are contraindicated
in individuals who are pregnant or actively
tryingtoconceiveand arenot recommended
for use in individuals who are nursing. Indi-
viduals of childbearing potential should
receive counseling regarding the use of
reliable methods of contraception. Of
note, while weight loss medications are
often used in people with type 1 diabe-
tes, clinical trial data in this population
are limited.
Assessing Efficacy and Safety of
Obesity Pharmacotherapy
Upon initiating medications for obesity,
assess their efﬁcacy and safety at least
monthly for the ﬁrst 3 months and at
least quarterly thereafter. Modeling from
published clinical trials consistently shows
that early responders have improved
long-term outcomes (84,85); however, it
is notable that the response rate with the
latest generation of obesity pharmaco-
therapies is much higher (48,83). Unless
clinical circumstances (such as poor toler-
ability) or other considerations (such as ﬁ-
nancial expense or individual preference)
suggest otherwise, those who achieve
sufﬁcient early weight loss upon starting
a chronic obesity medication (typically de-
ﬁned as >5% weight loss after 3 months
of use) should continue the medication
long term. When early weight loss results
are modest (typically <5% weight loss af-
ter 3 months of use), the beneﬁts of on-
going treatment need to be balanced in
the context of the glycemic response, the
availability of other potential treatment
options, treatment tolerance, and overall
treatment burden.
Ongoing monitoring of the achievement
and maintenance of weight management
goals is recommended. For those not reach-
ing or maintaining weight-related treatment
goals, reevaluate weight management ther-
apies and intensify treatment with addi-
tional approaches (e.g., metabolic surgery,
additional pharmacologic agents, and struc-
tured lifestyle management programs).
MEDICAL DEVICES FOR WEIGHT
LOSS
While gastric banding devices have fallen
out of favor due to their limited long-
term efﬁcacy and high rate of complica-
tions, several minimally invasive medical
devices have been approved by the FDA
for short-term weight loss, including im-
planted gastric balloons, a vagus nerve
stimulator, and gastric aspiration therapy
(86). High cost, limited insurance coverage,
and limited data supporting the efﬁcacy of
these devices in the treatment of individu-
als with diabetes has created uncertainty
for their current use (87).
An oral hydrogel (cellulose and citric
acid) has been approved for long-term
use in those with BMI >25 kg/m2 to
simulate the space-occupying effect of
implantable gastric balloons. Taken with
water 30 min before meals, the hydrogel
expands to ﬁll a portion of the stomach
volume to help decrease food intake dur-
ing meals. The average weight loss was
relatively small (2.1% greater than pla-
cebo), and very few participants had dia-
betes at baseline (10%) (88).
METABOLIC SURGERY
Recommendations
8.19 Consider metabolic surgery as a
weight and glycemic management ap-
proach in people with diabetes with
BMI $30.0 kg/m2 (or $27.5 kg/m2 in
Asian American individuals) who are
otherwise good surgical candidates. A
8.20 Metabolic surgery should be
performed in high-volume centers
with interprofessional teams knowl-
edgeable about and
experienced
in managing obesity, diabetes, and
gastrointestinal surgery (www.facs
.org/quality-programs/accreditation-
and-veriﬁcation/metabolic-and-bariatric-
surgery-accreditation-and-quality-
improvement-program/). E
8.21 People being considered for met-
abolic surgery should be evaluated for
comorbid psychological conditions and
social and situational circumstances
that have the potential to interfere
with surgery outcomes. B
8.22 People who undergo metabolic
surgery should receive long-term med-
ical and behavioral support and rou-
tine micronutrient, nutritional, and
metabolic status monitoring. B
8.23 If post–metabolic surgery hypogly-
cemia is suspected, clinical evaluation
should exclude other potential disor-
ders contributing to hypoglycemia, and
management should include education,
medical nutrition therapy with a regis-
tered dietitian/nutritionist experienced in
post–metabolic surgery hypoglycemia,
and medication treatment, as needed.
A Continuous glucose monitoring
should be considered as an important
adjunct to improve safety by alerting
individuals to hypoglycemia, especially
diabetesjournals.org/care
Obesity and Weight Management for Type 2 Diabetes
S149
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Table 8.1—Obesity pharmacotherapy
Medication name and
typical adult maintenance
dose
Average wholesale price
(median and range for
30-day supply) (142)
National Average Drug
Acquisition Cost
(30-day supply) (143)
Treatment arms
Weight loss
(% loss from
baseline)
Common side effects
(144–149)
Possible safety concerns and
considerations (144–149)
Short-term treatment (12 weeks)
Sympathomimetic amine anorectic
Phentermine (150)
8–37.5 mg q.d.*
$43 ($5–$90),
37.5 mg/day
$2
(37.5 mg dose)
15 mg q.d.
7.5 mg q.d.
Placebo
5.0
4.9
1.9
Dry mouth, insomnia,
dizziness, irritability,
increased blood pressure,
elevated heart rate
 Contraindicated for use in
combination with monoamine
oxidase inhibitors
Long-term treatment (52 or 56 weeks)
Lipase inhibitor
Orlistat (4)
60 mg t.i.d. (OTC)
120 mg t.i.d. (Rx)
$52 ($41–$82)
$843 ($781–$904)
NA
$722
120 mg t.i.d.†
Placebo
9.6
5.6
Abdominal pain, ﬂatulence,
fecal urgency
 Potential malabsorption of fat-
soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K) and of
certain medications (e.g.,
cyclosporine, thyroid hormone,
anticonvulsants)
 Rare cases of severe liver injury
reported
 Cholelithiasis
 Nephrolithiasis
Sympathomimetic amine anorectic/antiepileptic combination
Phentermine/topiramate ER (47)
7.5 mg/46 mg q.d.‡
$223
(7.5 mg/46 mg dose)
$179
(7.5 mg/46 mg
dose)
15 mg/92 mg q.d.§
7.5 mg/46 mg q.d.§
Placebo
9.8
7.8
1.2
Constipation, paresthesia,
insomnia, nasopharyngitis,
xerostomia, increased
blood pressure
 Contraindicated for use in
combination with monoamine
oxidase inhibitors
 Birth defects
 Cognitive impairment
 Acute angle-closure glaucoma
Opioid antagonist/antidepressant combination
Naltrexone/bupropion ER (15)
16 mg/180 mg b.i.d.
$750
$599
16 mg/180 mg b.i.d.
Placebo
5.0
1.8
Constipation, nausea,
headache, xerostomia,
insomnia, elevated heart
rate and blood pressure
 Contraindicated in people with
unmanaged hypertension and/or
seizure disorders
 Contraindicated for use with
chronic opioid therapy
 Acute angle-closure glaucoma
Black box warning:
 Risk of suicidal behavior/ideation in
people younger than 24 years old
who have depression
Continued on p. S151
S150
Obesity and Weight Management for Type 2 Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Table 8.1—Continued
Medication name and
typical adult maintenance
dose
Average wholesale price
(median and range for
30-day supply) (142)
National Average Drug
Acquisition Cost
(30-day supply) (143)
Treatment arms
Weight loss
(% loss from
baseline)
Common side effects
(144–149)
Possible safety concerns and
considerations (144–149)
Glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist
Liraglutide (16,49)jj
3 mg q.d.
$1,619
$1,294
3.0 mg q.d.
1.8 mg q.d.
Placebo
6.0
4.7
2.0
Gastrointestinal side effects
(nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, esophageal
reﬂux), injection site
reactions, elevated heart
rate, hypoglycemia
 Pancreatitis has been reported in
clinical trials, but causality has not
been established. Discontinue if
pancreatitis is suspected.
 Use caution in people with kidney
disease when initiating or increasing
dose due to potential risk of acute
kidney injury.
 May cause cholelithiasis and gallstone-
related complications.
 Gastrointestinal disorders (severe
constipation and small bowel
obstruction/ileus progression)
 Monitor for potential consequences of
delayed absorption of oral medications.
Black box warning:
 Risk of thyroid C-cell tumors in
rodents; human relevance not
determined
Semaglutide (48,151)jj
2.4 mg once weekly
$1,619
$1,295
2.4 mg weekly
1.0 mg weekly
Placebo
9.6
7.0
3.4
Gastrointestinal side effects
(nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, esophageal
reﬂux), injection site
reactions, elevated heart
rate, hypoglycemia
 Pancreatitis has been reported in
clinical trials, but causality has not
been established. Discontinue if
pancreatitis is suspected.
 Use caution in people with kidney
disease when initiating or increasing
dose due to potential risk of acute
kidney injury.
 May cause cholelithiasis and gallstone-
related complications.
 Gastrointestinal disorders (severe
constipation and small bowel
obstruction/ileus progression)
 Monitor for potential consequences of
delayed absorption of oral medications.
Black box warning:
 Risk of thyroid C-cell tumors in
rodents; human relevance not
determined
Continued on p. S152
diabetesjournals.org/care
Obesity and Weight Management for Type 2 Diabetes
S151
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Table 8.1—Continued
Medication name and
typical adult maintenance
dose
Average wholesale price
(median and range for
30-day supply) (142)
National Average Drug
Acquisition Cost
(30-day supply) (143)
Treatment arms
Weight loss
(% loss from
baseline)
Common side effects
(144–149)
Possible safety concerns and
considerations (144–149)
Dual glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide and glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist
Tirzepatide (83)
5 mg, 10 mg, or
15 mg once weekly
NA
NA
10 mg weekly
15 mg weekly
Placebo
12.8
14.7
3.2
Gastrointestinal side effects
(nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, esophageal
reﬂux), injection site
reactions, elevated heart
rate, hypoglycemia
 Pancreatitis has been reported in
clinical trials, but causality has not
been established. Discontinue if
pancreatitis is suspected.
 Use caution in people with kidney
disease when initiating or increasing
dose due to potential risk of acute
kidney injury.
 May cause cholelithiasis and
gallstone-related complications.
 Gastrointestinal disorders (severe
constipation and small bowel
obstruction/ileus progression)
 Monitor effects of oral medications
with narrow therapeutic index
(warfarin) or whose efﬁcacy is
dependent on threshold
concentration.
 Advise those using oral hormonal
contraception to use or add a non-
oral contraception method for
4 weeks after initiation and dose
escalations.
Black box warning:
 Risk of thyroid C-cell tumors in
rodents; human relevance not
determined.
Select safety and side effect information is provided; for a comprehensive discussion of safety considerations, please refer to the prescribing information for each agent. b.i.d., twice daily; ER, extended release;
OTC, over the counter; NA, data not available; Rx, prescription; t.i.d., three times daily, p.o., by mouth; SC, subcutaneous injection; AWP, average wholesale price; NADAC, National Average Drug Acquisition
Cost. *Use lowest effective dose; maximum appropriate dose is 37.5 mg. Weight loss data were extracted from the 12-week time point, as phentermine is approved for use for up to 12 weeks. †Enrolled partic-
ipants had normal (79%) or impaired (21%) glucose tolerance. ‡Maximum dose, depending on response, is 15 mg/92 mg q.d. §Approximately 68% of enrolled participants had type 2 diabetes or impaired glu-
cose tolerance. jjAgent has indication for reduction of cardiovascular events (49,151). AWP and NADAC prices for 30-day supply of maximum or maintenance dose as of 6 September 2023.
S152
Obesity and Weight Management for Type 2 Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

for those with severe hypoglycemia
or hypoglycemia unawareness. E
8.24 In people who undergo metabolic
surgery, routinely screen for psychoso-
cial and behavioral health changes and
refer to a qualiﬁed behavioral health
professional as needed. C
8.25 Monitor individuals who have
undergone metabolic surgery for in-
sufﬁcient weight loss or weight recur-
rence at least every 6–12 months. E
In those who have insufﬁcient weight
loss or experience weight recurrence,
assess for potential predisposing fac-
tors and, if appropriate, consider addi-
tional weight loss interventions (e.g.,
obesity pharmacotherapy). C
Surgical procedures for obesity treat-
ment—often referred to interchangeably
as bariatric surgery, weight loss surgery,
metabolic surgery, or metabolic/bariatric
surgery—can promote signiﬁcant and du-
rable weight loss and improve type 2 dia-
betes. Given the magnitude and rapidity
of improvement of hyperglycemia and
glucose homeostasis, these procedures
have been suggested as treatments for
type 2 diabetes even in the absence of
severe obesity, hence the current pre-
ferred terminology of “metabolic sur-
gery” (89).
A substantial body of evidence, includ-
ing data from numerous large cohort
studies and randomized controlled (non-
blinded) clinical trials, demonstrates that
metabolic surgery achieves superior gly-
cemic management and reduction of car-
diovascular risk in people with type 2
diabetes and obesity compared with non-
surgical intervention (45). In addition to
improving glycemia, metabolic surgery re-
duces the incidence of microvascular dis-
ease (90), improves quality of life (45,91,92),
decreases cancer risk, and improves car-
diovascular disease risk factors and long-
term cardiovascular events (93–104).
Cohort studies that match surgical and
nonsurgical subjects strongly suggest that
metabolic surgery reduces all-cause mor-
tality (105,106).
The overwhelming majority of proce-
dures in the U.S. are vertical sleeve gastrec-
tomy (VSG) and Roux-en-Y gastric bypass
(RYGB). Both procedures result in an ana-
tomically smaller stomach pouch and often
robust changes in enteroendocrine hor-
mones. In VSG, 80% of the stomach is
removed, leaving behind a long, thin
sleeve-shaped pouch. RYGB creates a
much smaller stomach pouch (roughly
the size of a walnut), which is then
attached to the distal small intestine,
thereby bypassing the duodenum and
jejunum.
Metabolic surgery has been demon-
strated to have beneﬁcial effects on type 2
diabetes irrespective of the presurgical
BMI (107). The American Society for Met-
abolic and Bariatric Surgery is now recom-
mending metabolic surgery for people
with type 2 diabetes and a BMI $30 kg/m2
(or $27.5 kg/m2 for Asian American indi-
viduals) in surgically eligible individuals.
Studies have documented diabetes remis-
sion after 1–5 years in 30–63% of individ-
uals with RYGB (17,108).
Most notably, the Surgical Treatment
and Medications Potentially Eradicate Di-
abetes Efﬁciently (STAMPEDE) trial, which
randomized 150 participants with poorly
managed diabetes to receive either meta-
bolic surgery or medical treatment, found
that 29% of those treated with RYGB and
23% treated with VSG achieved A1C of
6.0% or lower after 5 years (45). Available
data suggest an erosion of diabetes re-
mission over time (46); at least 35–50%
of individuals who initially achieve remis-
sion of diabetes eventually experience re-
currence. Still, the median disease-free
period among such individuals following
RYGB is 8.3 years (109,110), and the major-
ity of those who undergo surgery maintain
substantial
improvement
of
glycemia
from baseline for at least 5–15 years
(45,91,94,95,110–113).
Exceedingly few presurgical predictors
of success have been identiﬁed, but youn-
ger age, shorter duration of diabetes (e.g.,
<8 years) (84), and lesser severity of dia-
betes (better glycemic control, not using
insulin) are associated with higher rates
of diabetes remission (45,94,112,114).
Greater baseline visceral fat area may
also predict improved postoperative out-
comes, especially among Asian American
people with type 2 diabetes (115).
Although surgery has been shown to
improve the metabolic proﬁles and car-
diovascular risk of people with type 1 dia-
betes, larger and longer-term studies are
needed to determine the role of meta-
bolic surgery in such individuals (116).
Whereas metabolic surgery has greater
initial costs than nonsurgical obesity treat-
ments, retrospective analyses and model-
ing studies suggest that surgery may be
cost-effective or even cost-saving for indi-
viduals with type 2 diabetes. However,
these results largely depend on assump-
tions about the long-term effectiveness
and safety of the procedures (117,118).
The safety of metabolic surgery has im-
proved signiﬁcantly with continued reﬁne-
ment of minimally invasive (laparoscopic)
approaches, enhanced training and
credentialing, and involvement of inter-
professional teams. Perioperative mortal-
ity rates are typically 0.1–0.5%, similar to
those of common abdominal procedures
such as cholecystectomy or hysterectomy
(119–123). Major complications occur in
2–6% of those undergoing metabolic sur-
gery, which compares favorably with the
rates for other commonly performed elec-
tive operations (123). Postsurgical recovery
times and morbidity have also dramatically
declined. Minor complications and need
for operative reintervention occur in up
to 15% (119–128). Empirical data suggest
that the proﬁciency of the operating sur-
geon and surgical team is an important fac-
tor in determining mortality, complications,
reoperations, and readmissions (129). Ac-
cordingly, metabolic surgery should be
performed in high-volume centers with
interprofessional teams experienced in
managing diabetes, obesity, and gastroin-
testinal surgery. Refer to the American
College of Surgeons website for informa-
tion on accreditation and to locate an ac-
credited program (https://www.facs.org/
quality-programs/accreditation-and-
veriﬁcation/metabolic-and-bariatric-surgery-
accreditation-and-quality-improvement-
program/).
Beyond the perioperative period, longer-
term risks include vitamin and mineral deﬁ-
ciencies, anemia, osteoporosis, dumping
syndrome, and severe hypoglycemia (130).
Nutritional and micronutrient deﬁciencies
and related complications occur with a vari-
able frequency depending on the type of
procedure and require routine monitoring
of micronutrient and nutritional status and
lifelong vitamin/nutritional supplementa-
tion (130). Dumping syndrome usually oc-
curs shortly (10–30 min) after a meal and
may present with diarrhea, nausea, vom-
iting, palpitations, and fatigue; hypoglyce-
mia is usually not present at the time of
symptoms but, in some cases, may de-
velop several hours later. Post–metabolic
surgery hypoglycemia can occur with
RYGB, VSG, and other gastrointestinal
procedures and may severely impact
quality of life (131–133). Post–metabolic
diabetesjournals.org/care
Obesity and Weight Management for Type 2 Diabetes
S153
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

surgery hypoglycemia is driven in part by
altered gastric emptying of ingested
nutrients, leading to rapid intestinal
glucose absorption and excessive post-
prandial secretion of GLP-1 and other
gastrointestinal peptides. As a result, over-
stimulation of insulin release and a sharp
drop in plasma glucose occur, most com-
monly 1–3 h after a high-carbohydrate
meal. Symptoms range from sweating,
tremor, tachycardia, and increased hunger
to impaired cognition, loss of conscious-
ness, and seizures. In contrast to dumping
syndrome, which often occurs soon after
surgery and improves over time, post–
bariatric surgery hypoglycemia typically
presents >1 year post-surgery. Diagnosis
is primarily made by a thorough history,
detailed records of food intake, physical
activity, and symptom patterns, and ex-
clusion of other potential causes (e.g.,
malnutrition, side effects of medications
or supplements, dumping syndrome, and
insulinoma). Initial management includes
education to facilitate reduced intake of
rapidly digested carbohydrates while en-
suring adequate intake of protein and
healthy fats, and vitamin/nutrient supple-
ments.When available, individuals should
be offered medical nutrition therapy with
a dietitian experienced in post–bariatric sur-
gery hypoglycemia and the use of continu-
ous glucose monitoring (ideally real-time
continuous glucose monitoring, which can
detect dropping glucose levels before severe
hypoglycemia occurs), especially for those
with hypoglycemia unawareness. Medica-
tion treatment, if needed, is primarily aimed
at slowing carbohydrate absorption (e.g.,
acarbose) or reducing GLP-1 and insulin se-
cretion (e.g., diazoxide, octreotide) (134).
People who undergo metabolic surgery
may also be at increased risk for sub-
stance abuse, worsening or new-onset
depression and/or anxiety disorders, and
suicidal ideation (130,135–140). Candi-
dates for metabolic surgery should be as-
sessed by a behavioral health professional
with expertise in obesity management
prior to consideration for surgery (141).
Surgery should be postponed in individu-
als with alcohol or substance use disor-
ders, severe depression, suicidal ideation,
or other signiﬁcant behavioral health con-
ditions until these conditions have been
sufﬁciently addressed. Individuals with
preoperative or new-onset psychopathol-
ogy should be assessed regularly following
surgery to optimize behavioral health and
postsurgical outcomes.
References
1. Narayan KM, Boyle JP, Thompson TJ, Gregg
EW, Williamson DF. Effect of BMI on lifetime risk
for diabetes in the U.S. Diabetes Care 2007;30:
1562–1566
2. Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE, et al.;
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.
Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with
lifestyle intervention or metformin. N Engl J Med
2002;346:393–403
3. Garvey WT, Ryan DH, Henry R, et al. Prevention
of type 2 diabetes in subjects with prediabetes and
metabolic syndrome treated with phentermine
and topiramate extended release. Diabetes Care
2014;37:912–921
4. Torgerson JS, Hauptman J, Boldrin MN, Sj€ostr€om
L. XENical in the prevention of diabetes in obese
subjects (XENDOS) study: a randomized study of
orlistat as an adjunct to lifestyle changes for the
prevention of type 2 diabetes in obese patients.
Diabetes Care 2004;27:155–161
5. le Roux CW, Astrup A, Fujioka K, et al.; SCALE
Obesity Prediabetes NN8022-1839 Study Group.
3 years of liraglutide versus placebo for type 2
diabetes risk reduction and weight management
in individuals with prediabetes: a randomised,
double-blind trial. Lancet 2017;389:1399–1409
6. Booth H, Khan O, Prevost T, et al. Incidence of
type 2 diabetes after bariatric surgery: population-
based matched cohort study. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol 2014;2:963–968
7. UKPDS Group. UK Prospective Diabetes Study 7:
response of fasting plasma glucose to diet therapy
in newly presenting type II diabetic patients.
Metabolism 1990;39:905–912
8. Goldstein DJ. Beneﬁcial health effects of modest
weight loss. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 1992;
16:397–415
9. Pastors JG, Warshaw H, Daly A, Franz M,
Kulkarni K. The evidence for the effectiveness of
medical nutrition therapy in diabetes management.
Diabetes Care 2002;25:608–613
10. Lim EL, Hollingsworth KG, Aribisala BS, Chen
MJ, Mathers JC, Taylor R. Reversal of type 2
diabetes: normalisation of beta cell function in
association with decreased pancreas and liver
triacylglycerol. Diabetologia 2011;54:2506–2514
11. Jackness C, Karmally W, Febres G, et al. Very
low-calorie diet mimics the early beneﬁcial effect
of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass on insulin sensitivity
and b-cell function in type 2 diabetic patients.
Diabetes 2013;62:3027–3032
12. Rothberg AE, McEwen LN, Kraftson AT,
Fowler CE, Herman WH. Very-low-energy diet for
type 2 diabetes: an underutilized therapy? J
Diabetes Complications 2014;28:506–510
13. Hollander PA, Elbein SC, Hirsch IB, et al. Role
of orlistat in the treatment of obese patients with
type 2 diabetes: a 1-year randomized double-
blind study. Diabetes Care 1998;21:1288–1294
14. Garvey WT, Ryan DH, Bohannon NJ, et al.
Weight-loss therapy in type 2 diabetes: effects of
phentermine and topiramate extended release.
Diabetes Care 2014;37:3309–3316
15. Hollander P, Gupta AK, Plodkowski R, et al.;
COR-Diabetes Study Group. Effects of naltrexone
sustained-release/bupropion sustained-release
combination therapy on body weight and glycemic
parameters in overweight and obese patients with
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2013;36:4022–
4029
16. Davies MJ, Bergenstal R, Bode B, et al.;
NN8022-1922 Study Group. Efﬁcacy of liraglutide
for weight loss among patients with type 2
diabetes: the SCALE diabetes randomized clinical
trial. JAMA 2015;314:687–699
17. Rubino F, Nathan DM, Eckel RH, et al.;
Delegates of the 2nd Diabetes Surgery Summit.
Metabolic surgery in the treatment algorithm for
type 2 diabetes: a joint statement by international
diabetes organizations. Obes Surg 2017;27:2–21
18. Steven S, Hollingsworth KG, Al-Mrabeh A,
et al.Very low-calorie diet and 6 months of weight
stability in type 2 diabetes: pathophysiological
changes in responders and nonresponders. Diabetes
Care 2016;39:808–815
19. Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, et al.;
American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines;
Obesity Society. 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline for
the management of overweight and obesity in
adults: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force
on Practice Guidelines and The Obesity Society. J
Am Coll Cardiol 2014;63(25 Pt B):2985–3023
20. Lean ME, Leslie WS, Barnes AC, et al. Primary
care-led weight management for remission of
type 2 diabetes (DiRECT): an open-label, cluster-
randomised trial. Lancet 2018;391:541–551
21. Lean MEJ, Leslie WS, Barnes AC, et al.
Durability of a primary care-led weight-management
intervention for remission of type 2 diabetes: 2-year
results of the DiRECTopen-label, cluster-randomised
trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2019;7:344–355
22. Kahan S, Fujioka K. Obesity pharmacotherapy
in patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Spectr
2017;30:250–257
23. Wiggins T, Guidozzi N, Welbourn R, Ahmed
AR, Markar SR. Association of bariatric surgery
with all-cause mortality and incidence of obesity-
related disease at a population level: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. PLoS Med 2020;17:
e1003206
24. Aminian A, Wilson R, Zajichek A, et al.
Cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2
diabetes and obesity: comparison of gastric bypass,
sleeve gastrectomy, and usual care. Diabetes Care
2021;44:2552–2563
25. World Health Organization. Obesity, 2023.
Accessed 3 September 2023. Available from
https://www.who.int/health-topics/obesity#tab=
tab_1
26. WHO
Expert
Consultation.
Appropriate
body-mass index for Asian populations and its
implications for policy and intervention strategies.
Lancet 2004;363:157–163
27. Araneta MR, Kanaya AM, Hsu WC, et al.
Optimum BMI cut points to screen Asian Americans
for type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2015;38:814–820
28. Aggarwal R, Bibbins-Domingo K, Yeh RW,
et al. Diabetes screening by race and ethnicity in
the United States: equivalent body mass index
and age thresholds. Ann Intern Med 2022;175:765–
773
29. Rubino F, Batterham RL, Koch M, et al.
Lancet Diabetes & Endocrinology Commission on
the deﬁnition and diagnosis of clinical obesity.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2023;11:226–228
S154
Obesity and Weight Management for Type 2 Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

30. Klein S, Gastaldelli A, Yki-J€arvinen H, Scherer
PE. Why does obesity cause diabetes? Cell Metab
2022;34:11–20
31. American Medical Association. AMA Manual
of Style: A Guide for Authors and Editors. Oxford
University Press, 2019
32. American Medical Association. Person-First
Language for Obesity H-440.821. Accessed 15
October 2023. Available from https://policysearch
.ama-assn.org/policyﬁnder/detail/obesity?uri=
%2FAMADoc%2FHOD.xml-H-440.821.xml
33. Kushner RF, Batsis JA, Butsch WS, et al.
Weight history in clinical practice: the state of the
science and future directions. Obesity (Silver
Spring) 2020;28:9–17
34. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2017
ACC/AHA/HFSA focused update of the 2013
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of
heart failure: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force
on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Failure
Society of America. J Am Coll Cardiol 2017;70:
776–803
35. Bosch X, Monclus E, Escoda O, et al.
Unintentional weight loss: clinical characteristics
and outcomes in a prospective cohort of 2677
patients. PLoS One 2017;12:e0175125
36. Wilding JP. The importance of weight
management in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Int J
Clin Pract 2014;68:682–691
37. Van Gaal L, Scheen A. Weight management in
type 2 diabetes: current and emerging approaches
to treatment. Diabetes Care 2015;38:1161–1172
38. Warren J, Smalley B, Barefoot N. Higher
motivation for weight loss in African American
than Caucasian rural patients with hypertension
and/or diabetes. Ethn Dis 2016;26:77–84
39. Stoops H, Dar M. Equity and obesity treatment
- expanding medicaid-covered interventions. N Engl
J Med 2023;388:2309–2311
40. Rothberg AE, McEwen LN, Kraftson AT, et al.
Impact of weight loss on waist circumference and
the components of the metabolic syndrome. BMJ
Open Diabetes Res Care 2017;5:e000341
41. Wing RR, Bolin P, Brancati FL, et al.; Look
AHEAD Research Group. Cardiovascular effects of
intensive lifestyle intervention in type 2 diabetes.
N Engl J Med 2013;369:145–154
42. Look AHEAD Research Group. Eight-year
weight losses with an intensive lifestyle intervention:
the Look AHEAD study. Obesity (Silver Spring)
2014;22:5–13
43. Gregg EW, Jakicic JM, Blackburn G, et al.;
Look AHEAD Research Group. Association of the
magnitude of weight loss and changes in physical
ﬁtness with long-term cardiovascular disease
outcomes in overweight or obese people with
type 2 diabetes: a post-hoc analysis of the Look
AHEAD randomised clinical trial. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol 2016;4:913–921
44. Baum A, Scarpa J, Bruzelius E, Tamler R, Basu
S, Faghmous J. Targeting weight loss interventions
to reduce cardiovascular complications of type 2
diabetes: a machine learning-based post-hoc
analysis of heterogeneous treatment effects in
the Look AHEAD trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
2017;5:808–815
45. Schauer PR, Bhatt DL, Kirwan JP, et al.;
STAMPEDE Investigators. Bariatric surgery versus
intensive medical therapy for diabetes - 5-year
outcomes. N Engl J Med 2017;376:641–651
46. Ikramuddin S, Korner J, Lee WJ, et al.
Durability of addition of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass to
lifestyle intervention and medical management in
achieving primary treatment goals for uncontrolled
type 2 diabetes in mild to moderate obesity: a
randomized control trial. Diabetes Care 2016;39:
1510–1518
47. Gadde KM, Allison DB, Ryan DH, et al. Effects
of low-dose, controlled-release, phentermine plus
topiramate combination on weight and associated
comorbidities in overweight and obese adults
(CONQUER): a randomised, placebo-controlled,
phase 3 trial. Lancet 2011;377:1341–1352
48. Davies M, Færch L, Jeppesen OK, et al.; STEP 2
Study Group. Semaglutide 2·4 mg once a week in
adults with overweight or obesity, and type 2
diabetes (STEP 2): a randomised, double-blind,
double-dummy, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial.
Lancet 2021;397:971–984
49. Marso SP, Daniels GH, Brown-Frandsen K,
et al.; LEADER Steering Committee; LEADER Trial
Investigators.
Liraglutide
and
cardiovascular
outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med
2016;375:311–322
50. Rosenstock J, Wysham C, Frıas JP, et al.
Efﬁcacy and safety of a novel dual GIP and GLP-1
receptor agonist tirzepatide in patients with type 2
diabetes (SURPASS-1): a double-blind, randomised,
phase 3 trial. Lancet 2021;398:143–155
51. Frıas JP, Davies MJ, Rosenstock J, et al.;
SURPASS-2
Investigators.
Tirzepatide
versus
semaglutide once weekly in patients with type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2021;385:503–515
52. Magkos F, Fraterrigo G, Yoshino J, et al.
Effects of moderate and subsequent progressive
weight loss on metabolic function and adipose
tissue biology in humans with obesity. Cell Metab
2016;23:591–601
53. Evert AB, Dennison M, Gardner CD, et al.
Nutrition therapy for adults with diabetes or
prediabetes: a consensus report. Diabetes Care
2019;42:731–754
54. Franz MJ, Boucher JL, Rutten-Ramos S,
VanWormer JJ. Lifestyle weight-loss intervention
outcomes in overweight and obese adults with
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomized clinical trials. J Acad Nutr
Diet 2015;115:1447–1463
55. Sacks FM, Bray GA, Carey VJ, et al.
Comparison of weight-loss diets with different
compositions of fat, protein, and carbohydrates.
N Engl J Med 2009;360:859–873
56. de Souza RJ, Bray GA, Carey VJ, et al. Effects
of 4 weight-loss diets differing in fat, protein, and
carbohydrate on fat mass, lean mass, visceral
adipose tissue, and hepatic fat: results from the
POUNDS LOST trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;95:
614–625
57. Johnston BC, Kanters S, Bandayrel K, et al.
Comparison of weight loss among named diet
programs in overweight and obese adults: a
meta-analysis. JAMA 2014;312:923–933
58. Ye W, Xu L, Ye Y, et al.The efﬁcacy and safety
of meal replacement in patients with type 2
diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2023;108:
3041–3049
59. Leung CW, Epel ES, Ritchie LD, Crawford PB,
Laraia BA. Food insecurity is inversely associated
with diet quality of lower-income adults. J Acad
Nutr Diet 2014;114:1943–1953.e1942
60. Kahan S, Manson JE. Obesity treatment,
beyond the guidelines: practical suggestions for
clinical practice. JAMA 2019;321:1349–1350
61. Hoerster KD, Hunter-Merrill R, Nguyen T,
et al. Effect of a remotely delivered self-directed
behavioral intervention on body weight and
physical health status among adults with obesity:
the D-ELITE randomized clinical trial. JAMA
2022;328:2230–2241
62. Appel LJ, Clark JM,Yeh HC, et al. Comparative
effectiveness of weight-loss interventions in clinical
practice. N Engl J Med 2011;365:1959–1968
63. Wadden TA, Tronieri JS, Butryn ML. Lifestyle
modiﬁcation approaches for the treatment of
obesity in adults. Am Psychol 2020;75:235–251
64. Donnelly JE, Blair SN, Jakicic JM, Manore
MM, Rankin JW; American College of Sports
Medicine. American College of Sports Medicine
position stand. Appropriate physical activity inter-
vention strategies for weight loss and prevention
of weight regain for adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2009;41:459–471
65. Gudzune KA, Doshi RS, Mehta AK, et al.
Efﬁcacy of commercial weight-loss programs: an
updated systematic review. Ann Intern Med 2015;
162:501–512
66. Bloom B, Mehta AK, Clark JM, Gudzune KA.
Guideline-concordant weight-loss programs in an
urban area are uncommon and difﬁcult to identify
through the internet. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2016;
24:583–588
67. Muscogiuri G, Barrea L, Laudisio D, et al.The
management of very low-calorie ketogenic diet
in obesity outpatient clinic: a practical guide. J
Transl Med 2019;17:356
68. Saris WH.Very-low-calorie diets and sustained
weight loss. Obes Res 2001;9(Suppl. 4):295S–301S
69. Gardner CD, Kim S, Bersamin A, et al.
Micronutrient quality of weight-loss diets that
focus on macronutrients: results from the A TO Z
study. Am J Clin Nutr 2010;92:304–312
70. Tsai AG, Wadden TA. The evolution of very-
low-calorie diets: an update and meta-analysis.
Obesity (Silver Spring) 2006;14:1283–1293
71. Johansson K, Neovius M, Hemmingsson E.
Effects of anti-obesity drugs, diet, and exercise on
weight-loss maintenance after a very-low-calorie
diet or low-calorie diet: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am
J Clin Nutr 2014;99:14–23
72. Batsis JA, Apolzan JW, Bagley PJ, et al. A
systematic review of dietary supplements and
alternative therapies for weight loss. Obesity
(Silver Spring) 2021;29:1102–1113
73. Bessell E, Maunder A, Lauche R, Adams J,
Sainsbury A, Fuller NR. Efﬁcacy of dietary
supplements containing isolated organic compounds
for weight loss: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomised placebo-controlled trials. Int J
Obes 2021;45:1631–1643
74. Maunder A, Bessell E, Lauche R, Adams J,
Sainsbury A, Fuller NR. Effectiveness of herbal
medicines for weight loss: a systematic review
and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Diabetes Obes Metab 2020;22:891–903
75. Zhang FF, Barr SI, McNulty H, Li D, Blumberg JB.
Health effects of vitamin and mineral supplements.
BMJ 2020;369:m2511
76. Mallard SR, Howe AS, Houghton LA. Vitamin
D status and weight loss: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized and nonrandomized
diabetesjournals.org/care
Obesity and Weight Management for Type 2 Diabetes
S155
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

controlled weight-loss trials. Am J Clin Nutr 2016;
104:1151–1159
77. Moon J, Koh G. Clinical evidence and
mechanisms of high-protein diet-induced weight
loss. J Obes Metab Syndr 2020;29:166–173
78. Kim JE, O’Connor LE, Sands LP, Slebodnik
MB, Campbell WW. Effects of dietary protein
intake on body composition changes after weight
loss in older adults: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Nutr Rev 2016;74:210–224
79. Hill-Briggs F, Adler NE, Berkowitz SA, et al.
Social determinants of health and diabetes: a
scientiﬁc review. Diabetes Care 2020;44:258–279
80. Domecq JP, Prutsky G, Leppin A, et al. Clinical
review: drugs commonly associated with weight
change: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2015;100:363–370
81. Drugs.com. Phentermine prescribing informa-
tion. Accessed 15 October 2023. Available from
https://www.drugs.com/pro/phentermine.html
82. Jastreboff AM, Aronne LJ, Ahmad NN, et al.;
SURMOUNT-1 Investigators.Tirzepatide once weekly
for the treatment of obesity. N Engl J Med 2022;
387:205–216
83. Garvey WT, Frias JP, Jastreboff AM, et al.;
SURMOUNT-2 investigators. Tirzepatide once
weekly for the treatment of obesity in people
with type 2 diabetes (SURMOUNT-2): a double-
blind, randomised, multicentre, placebo-controlled,
phase 3 trial. Lancet 2023;402:613–626
84. Fujioka K, O’Neil PM, Davies M, et al. Early
weight loss with liraglutide 3.0 mg predicts
1-year weight loss and is associated with
improvements in clinical markers. Obesity (Silver
Spring) 2016;24:2278–2288
85. Fujioka K, Plodkowski R, O’Neil PM, Gilder K,
Walsh B, Greenway FL. The relationship between
early weight loss and weight loss at 1 year with
naltrexone ER/bupropion ER combination therapy.
Int J Obes 2016;40:1369–1375
86. Sullivan S. Endoscopic medical devices for
primary obesity treatment in patients with diabetes.
Diabetes Spectr 2017;30:258–264
87. Kahan S, Saunders KH, Kaplan LM. Combining
obesity pharmacotherapy with endoscopic bariatric
and metabolic therapies. Techniques and Inno-
vations in Gastrointestinal Endoscopy 2020;22:
154–158
88. Greenway FL, Aronne LJ, Raben A, et al. A
randomized,
double-blind,
placebo-controlled
study of Gelesis100: a novel nonsystemic oral
hydrogel for weight loss. Obesity (Silver Spring)
2019;27:205–216
89. Eisenberg D, Shikora SA, Aarts E, et al. 2022
American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric
Surgery (ASMBS) and International Federation for
the Surgery of Obesity and Metabolic Disorders
(IFSO): indications for metabolic and bariatric
surgery. Surg Obes Relat Dis 2022;18:1345–1356
90. O’Brien R, Johnson E, Haneuse S, et al.
Microvascular outcomes in patients with diabetes
after bariatric surgery versus usual care: a matched
cohort study. Ann Intern Med 2018;169:300–310
91. Mingrone G, Panunzi S, De Gaetano A, et al.
Bariatric-metabolic surgery versus conventional
medical treatment in obese patients with type 2
diabetes: 5 year follow-up of an open-label,
single-centre, randomised controlled trial. Lancet
2015;386:964–973
92. Aminian A, Kashyap SR, Wolski KE, et al.
Patient-reported outcomes after metabolic surgery
versus medical therapy for diabetes: insights from
the STAMPEDE randomized trial. Ann Surg 2021;
274:524–532
93. Sj€ostr€om L, Lindroos AK, Peltonen M, et al.;
Swedish Obese Subjects Study Scientiﬁc Group.
Lifestyle, diabetes, and cardiovascular risk factors
10 years after bariatric surgery. N Engl J Med
2004;351:2683–2693
94. Sj€ostr€om L, Peltonen M, Jacobson P, et al.
Association of bariatric surgery with long-term
remission of type 2 diabetes and with micro-
vascular and macrovascular complications. JAMA
2014;311:2297–2304
95. Adams TD, Davidson LE, Litwin SE, et al.
Health beneﬁts of gastric bypass surgery after
6 years. JAMA 2012;308:1122–1131
96. Sj€ostr€om L, Narbro K, Sj€ostr€om CD, et al.;
Swedish Obese Subjects Study. Effects of bariatric
surgery on mortality in Swedish obese subjects.
N Engl J Med 2007;357:741–752
97. Sj€ostr€om L, Gummesson A, Sj€ostr€om CD,
et al.; Swedish Obese Subjects Study. Effects of
bariatric surgery on cancer incidence in obese
patients in Sweden (Swedish Obese Subjects
Study): a prospective, controlled intervention
trial. Lancet Oncol 2009;10:653–662
98. Sj€ostr€om L, Peltonen M, Jacobson P, et al.
Bariatric surgery and long-term cardiovascular
events. JAMA 2012;307:56–65
99. Adams TD, Gress RE, Smith SC, et al. Long-
term mortality after gastric bypass surgery. N Engl
J Med 2007;357:753–761
100. Arterburn DE, Olsen MK, Smith VA, et al.
Association between bariatric surgery and long-
term survival. JAMA 2015;313:62–70
101. Adams TD, Arterburn DE, Nathan DM,
Eckel RH. Clinical outcomes of metabolic surgery:
microvascular and macrovascular complications.
Diabetes Care 2016;39:912–923
102. Sheng B,Truong K, Spitler H, Zhang L,Tong X,
Chen L. The long-term effects of bariatric surgery
on type 2 diabetes remission, microvascular and
macrovascular complications, and mortality: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes Surg
2017;27:2724–2732
103. Fisher DP, Johnson E, Haneuse S, et al.
Association between bariatric surgery and macro-
vascular disease outcomes in patients with type 2
diabetes and severe obesity. JAMA 2018;320:
1570–1582
104. Billeter AT, Scheurlen KM, Probst P, et al.
Meta-analysis of metabolic surgery versus medical
treatment for microvascular complications in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Br J Surg
2018;105:168–181
105. Aminian A, Zajichek A, Arterburn DE, et al.
Association of metabolic surgery with major
adverse cardiovascular outcomes in patients with
type 2 diabetes and obesity. JAMA 2019;322:
1271–1282
106. Syn NL, Cummings DE, Wang LZ, et al.
Association of metabolic-bariatric surgery with
long-term survival in adults with and without
diabetes: a one-stage meta-analysis of matched
cohort and prospective controlled studies with
174 772 participants. Lancet 2021;397:1830–
1841
107. Li Y, Gu Y, Jin Y, Mao Z. Is bariatric surgery
effective for chinese patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus and body mass index < 35 kg/
m2? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes
Surg 2021;31:4083–4092
108. Isaman DJ, Rothberg AE, Herman WH.
Reconciliation of type 2 diabetes remission rates
in studies of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Diabetes
Care 2016;39:2247–2253
109. Sj€oholm K, Pajunen P, Jacobson P, et al.
Incidence and remission of type 2 diabetes in
relation to degree of obesity at baseline and 2
year weight change: the Swedish Obese Subjects
(SOS) study. Diabetologia 2015;58:1448–1453
110. Arterburn DE, Bogart A, Sherwood NE,
et al. A multisite study of long-term remission
and relapse of type 2 diabetes mellitus following
gastric bypass. Obes Surg 2013;23:93–102
111. Cohen RV, Pinheiro JC, Schiavon CA, Salles
JE, Wajchenberg BL, Cummings DE. Effects of
gastric bypass surgery in patients with type 2
diabetes and only mild obesity. Diabetes Care
2012;35:1420–1428
112. Brethauer SA, Aminian A, Romero-Talamas
H, et al. Can diabetes be surgically cured? Long-
term metabolic effects of bariatric surgery in
obese patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Ann
Surg 2013;258:628–636; discussion 636–637
113. Hsu CC, AlmulaiﬁA, Chen JC, et al. Effect of
bariatric surgery vs medical treatment on type 2
diabetes in patients with body mass index lower
than 35: ﬁve-year outcomes. JAMA Surg 2015;150:
1117–1124
114. Hariri K, Guevara D, Jayaram A, Kini SU,
Herron DM, Fernandez-Ranvier G. Preoperative
insulin therapy as a marker for type 2 diabetes
remission in obese patients after bariatric surgery.
Surg Obes Relat Dis 2018;14:332–337
115. Yu H, Di J, Bao Y, et al. Visceral fat area as a
new predictor of short-term diabetes remission after
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery in Chinese patients
with a body mass index less than 35 kg/m2. Surg
Obes Relat Dis 2015;11:6–11
116. Kirwan JP, Aminian A, Kashyap SR, Burguera
B, Brethauer SA, Schauer PR. Bariatric surgery in
obese patients with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes
Care 2016;39:941–948
117. Rubin JK, Hinrichs-Krapels S, Hesketh R,
Martin A, Herman WH, Rubino F. Identifying
barriers to appropriate use of metabolic/bariatric
surgery for type 2 diabetes treatment: policy lab
results. Diabetes Care 2016;39:954–963
118. Fouse T, Schauer P. The socioeconomic
impact of morbid obesity and factors affecting
access to obesity surgery. Surg Clin North Am
2016;96:669–679
119. Flum DR, Belle SH, King WC, et al.;
Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (LABS)
Consortium. Perioperative safety in the longitudinal
assessment of bariatric surgery. N Engl J Med
2009;361:445–454
120. Courcoulas AP, Christian NJ, Belle SH, et al.;
Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery
(LABS) Consortium. Weight change and health
outcomes at 3 years after bariatric surgery among
individuals with severe obesity. JAMA 2013;310:
2416–2425
121. Arterburn DE, Courcoulas AP. Bariatric
surgery for obesity and metabolic conditions in
adults. BMJ 2014;349:g3961
122. Young MT, Gebhart A, Phelan MJ, Nguyen
NT. Use and outcomes of laparoscopic sleeve
gastrectomy
vs laparoscopic
gastric
bypass:
analysis of the American College of Surgeons
NSQIP. J Am Coll Surg 2015;220:880–885
123. Aminian
A,
Brethauer SA,
Kirwan
JP,
Kashyap SR, Burguera B, Schauer PR. How safe is
S156
Obesity and Weight Management for Type 2 Diabetes
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

metabolic/diabetes surgery? Diabetes Obes Metab
2015;17:198–201
124. Birkmeyer NJ, Dimick JB, Share D, et al.;
Michigan Bariatric Surgery Collaborative. Hospital
complication rates with bariatric surgery in Michigan.
JAMA 2010;304:435–442
125. Altieri MS,Yang J,Telem DA, et al. Lap band
outcomes from 19,221 patients across centers
and over a decade within the state of New York.
Surg Endosc 2016;30:1725–1732
126. Hutter MM, Schirmer BD, Jones DB, et al.
First report from the American College of Surgeons
Bariatric Surgery Center Network: laparoscopic
sleeve gastrectomy has morbidity and effec-
tiveness positioned between the band and the
bypass.
Ann
Surg
2011;254:410–420;
dis-
cussion 420–422
127. Nguyen NT, Slone JA, Nguyen XM, Hartman
JS, Hoyt DB. A prospective randomized trial of
laparoscopic gastric bypass versus laparoscopic
adjustable gastric banding for the treatment of
morbid obesity: outcomes, quality of life, and
costs. Ann Surg 2009;250:631–641
128. Courcoulas AP, King WC, Belle SH, et al. Seven-
year weight trajectories and health outcomes in the
Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (LABS)
study. JAMA Surg 2018;153:427–434
129. Birkmeyer JD, Finks JF, O’Reilly A, et al.;
Michigan Bariatric Surgery Collaborative. Surgical
skill and complication rates after bariatric surgery.
N Engl J Med 2013;369:1434–1442
130. Mechanick JI, Apovian C, Brethauer S, et al.
Clinical practice guidelines for the perioperative
nutrition, metabolic, and nonsurgical support of
patients undergoing bariatric procedures - 2019
update: cosponsored by American Association
of Clinical Endocrinologists/American College of
Endocrinology, The Obesity Society, American
Society for Metabolic & Bariatric Surgery, Obesity
Medicine Association, and American Society of
Anesthesiologists - executive summary. Endocr
Pract 2019;25:1346–1359
131. Service GJ,Thompson GB, Service FJ, Andrews
JC, Collazo-Clavell ML, Lloyd RV. Hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemia with nesidioblastosis after gastric-
bypass surgery. N Engl J Med 2005;353:249–254
132. Sheehan A, Patti ME. Hypoglycemia after
upper gastrointestinal surgery: clinical approach to
assessment, diagnosis, and treatment. Diabetes
Metab Syndr Obes 2020;13:4469–4482
133. Lee D, Dreyfuss JM, Sheehan A, Puleio A,
Mulla CM, Patti ME. Glycemic patterns are distinct
in post-bariatric hypoglycemia after gastric bypass
(PBH-RYGB). J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2021;106:
2291–2303
134. Salehi M, Vella A, McLaughlin T, Patti ME.
Hypoglycemia after gastric bypass surgery: current
concepts and controversies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2018;103:2815–2826
135. Conason A,Teixeira J, Hsu CH, Puma L, Knafo
D, Geliebter A. Substance use following bariatric
weight loss surgery. JAMA Surg 2013;148:145–150
136. Bhatti JA, Nathens AB, Thiruchelvam D,
Grantcharov T, Goldstein BI, Redelmeier DA. Self-
harm emergencies after bariatric surgery: a
population-based cohort study. JAMA Surg 2016;
151:226–232
137. Peterh€ansel C, Petroff D, Klinitzke G,
Kersting A, Wagner B. Risk of completed suicide
after bariatric surgery: a systematic review. Obes
Rev 2013;14:369–382
138. Jakobsen GS, Småstuen MC, Sandbu R, et al.
Association of bariatric surgery vs medical obesity
treatment with long-term medical complications
and obesity-related comorbidities. JAMA 2018;319:
291–301
139. King WC, Chen JY, Mitchell JE, et al.
Prevalence of alcohol use disorders before and
after bariatric surgery. JAMA 2012;307:2516–
2525
140. Young-Hyman D, Peyrot M. Psychosocial
Care for People with Diabetes. 1st ed. Alexandria,
VA, American Diabetes Association, 2012
141. Greenberg I, Sogg S, M Perna F. Behavioral
and psychological care in weight loss surgery:
best practice update. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2009;
17:880–884
142. Merative Micromedex. RED BOOK (electronic
version). Merative, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Accessed
6 September 2023. Available from https://www
.micromedexsolutions.com
143. Data.Medicaid.gov.
NADAC
(National
Average Drug Acquisition Cost). Accessed
6 September 2023. Available from https://
data.medicaid.gov/dataset/dfa2ab14-06c2-457a-
9e36-5cb6d80f8d93
144. U.S.
National
Library
of
Medicine.
Phentermine-phentermine hydrochloride capsule.
Accessed 15 October 2023. Available from https://
dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo
.cfm?setid=737eef3b-9a6b-4ab3-a25c-49d8-
4d2a0197
145. Currax Pharmaceuticals. Contrave (naltrexone
HCl/bupropion HCl) extended-release tablets.
Accessed 15 October 2023. Available from
https://contrave.com
146. CHEPLAPHARM and H2-Pharma. Xenical
(orlistat). Accessed 15 October 2023. Available
from https://xenical.com
147. Vivus. Qsymia (phentermine and topiramate
extended-release capsules). Accessed 15 October
2023. Available from https://qsymia.com
148. Novo Nordisk. Saxenda (liraglutide injection
3 mg). Accessed 15 October 2023. Available from
https://www.saxenda.com
149. Eli Lilly and Company. Zepbound (tirzepatide).
Accessed 8 November 2023. Available from https://
pi.lilly.com/us/zepbound-uspi.pdf
150. Aronne LJ,Wadden TA, Peterson C,Winslow
D, Odeh S, Gadde KM. Evaluation of phentermine
and topiramate versus phentermine/topiramate
extended-release in obese adults. Obesity (Silver
Spring) 2013;21:2163–2171
151. Marso SP, Bain SC, Consoli A, et al.;
SUSTAIN-6 Investigators. Semaglutide and cardio-
vascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes.
N Engl J Med 2016;375:1834–1844
diabetesjournals.org/care
Obesity and Weight Management for Type 2 Diabetes
S157
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

9. Pharmacologic Approaches to
Glycemic Treatment: Standards
of Care in Diabetes—2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S158–S178 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S009
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” in-
cludes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to
provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guide-
lines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional
Practice Committee, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for
updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a
detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the
evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full
list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction
and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are
invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR ADULTS WITH TYPE 1 DIABETES
Recommendations
9.1 Treat most adults with type 1 diabetes with continuous subcutaneous in-
sulin infusion or multiple daily doses of prandial (injected or inhaled) and
basal insulin. A
9.2 For most adults with type 1 diabetes, insulin analogs (or inhaled insulin)
are preferred over injectable human insulins to minimize hypoglycemia risk. A
9.3 Early use of continuous glucose monitoring is recommended for adults
with type 1 diabetes to improve glycemic outcomes and quality of life and
minimize hypoglycemia. B
9.4 Automated insulin delivery systems should be considered for all adults
with type 1 diabetes. A
9.5 To improve glycemic outcomes and quality of life and minimize hypoglyce-
mia risk, most adults with type 1 diabetes should receive education on how
to match mealtime insulin doses to carbohydrate intake and, additionally, to
fat and protein intake. They should also be taught how to modify the insulin
dose (correction dose) based on concurrent glycemia, glycemic trends (if
available), sick-day management, and anticipated physical activity. B
9.6 Glucagon should be prescribed for all individuals taking insulin or at high
risk for hypoglycemia. Family, caregivers, school personnel, and others provid-
ing support to these individuals should know its location and be educated on
how to administer it. Glucagon preparations that do not require reconstitu-
tion are preferred. E
9.7 Insulin treatment plan and insulin-taking behavior should be reevaluated at
regular intervals (e.g., every 3–6 months) and adjusted to incorporate speciﬁc
*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee. 9. Pharmacologic
approaches to glycemic treatment: Standards of
Care in Diabetes—2024. Diabetes Care 2024;47
(Suppl. 1):S158–S178
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
9. PHARMACOLOGIC APPROACHES TO GLYCEMIC TREATMENT
S158
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

factors that impact choice of treat-
ment and ensure achievement of in-
dividualized glycemic goals. E
Insulin Therapy
Insulin treatment is essential for individu-
als with type 1 diabetes because the
hallmark of type 1 diabetes is absent or
near-absent b-cell function. In addition
to hyperglycemia, insulinopenia can con-
tribute to other metabolic disturbances
like hypertriglyceridemia and ketoacido-
sis as well as tissue catabolism that can
be life threatening. Severe metabolic de-
compensation can be, and was, mostly
prevented with once- or twice-daily in-
jections for the six or seven decades af-
ter the discovery of insulin. Over the
past four decades, evidence has accumu-
lated supporting more intensive insulin
replacement, using multiple daily injec-
tions of insulin or continuous subcutane-
ous administration through an insulin
pump, as providing the best combination
of effectiveness and safety for people
with type 1 diabetes.
The Diabetes Control and Complications
Trial (DCCT) demonstrated that intensive
therapy with multiple daily injections or
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion
(CSII) reduced A1C and was associated
with improved long-term outcomes (1–3).
The study was carried out with short-acting
(regular) and intermediate-acting (NPH)
human insulins. In this landmark trial,
lower A1C with intensive control (7%) led
to 50% reductions in microvascular com-
plications over 6 years of treatment. How-
ever, intensive therapy was associated
with a higher rate of severe hypoglycemia
than conventional treatment (62 com-
pared with 19 episodes per 100 patient-
years of therapy) (1). Follow-up of partici-
pants from the DCCT demonstrated fewer
macrovascular and microvascular compli-
cations in the group that received intensive
treatment. Achieving intensive glycemic
goals during the active treatment period of
the study had a beneﬁcial impact over the
20 years after the active treatment compo-
nent of the study ended (1–3).
Insulin replacement plans typically con-
sist of basal insulin, mealtime insulin, and
correction insulin (4). Basal insulin includes
NPH insulin, long-acting insulin analogs,
and continuous delivery of rapid-acting in-
sulin via an insulin pump. Basal insulin
analogs have longer duration of action
with ﬂatter, more constant and consistent
plasma concentrations and activity pro-
ﬁles than NPH insulin; rapid-acting analogs
(RAA) have a quicker onset and peak and
shorter duration of action than regular hu-
man insulin. In people with type 1 diabe-
tes, treatment with analog insulins is
associated with less hypoglycemia and
weight gain as well as lower A1C com-
pared with injectable human insulins
(5–7). More recently, two injectable ultra-
rapid-acting analog (URAA) insulin formu-
lations were developed to accelerate ab-
sorption and provide more activity in the
ﬁrst portion of their proﬁle compared with
the other RAA (8,9). Inhaled human insulin
has a rapid peak and shortened duration
of action compared with RAA (10) (see
also subsection ALTERNATIVE INSULIN ROUTES in
PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR ADULTS WITH TYPE 2
DIABETES). These newer formulations may
cause less hypoglycemia, while improving
postprandial glucose excursions and ad-
ministration ﬂexibility (in relation to pran-
dial intake), compared with RAA (10–12).
In addition, longer-acting basal analogs
(U-300 glargine or degludec) may confer a
lower hypoglycemia risk compared with
U-100 glargine in individuals with type 1
diabetes (13,14).
Despite the advantages of insulin ana-
logs in individuals with type 1 diabetes,
the expense and/or intensity of treat-
ment required for their use may be pro-
hibitive. There are multiple approaches
to insulin treatment. The central precept
in the management of type 1 diabetes is
that some form of insulin be given in a
deﬁned treatment plan tailored to the
individual to prevent diabetic ketoacido-
sis (DKA) and minimize clinically relevant
hypoglycemia while achieving the indi-
vidual’s glycemic goals. The impact of the
introductionofinterchangeablebiosimilars
and unbranded versions of some analog
products as well as current and upcoming
price reductions on insulin access need to
be evaluated. Reassessment of insulin-
taking behavior and adjustment of treat-
ment plans to account for speciﬁc factors,
including cost, that impact choice of treat-
ment is recommended at regular intervals
(every3–6months).
Most studies comparing multiple daily
injections with CSII have been relatively
small and of short duration. A systematic
review and meta-analysis concluded that
CSII via pump therapy has modest advan-
tages for lowering A1C (0.30% [95% CI
0.58 to 0.02]) and for reducing severe
hypoglycemia rates in children and adults
(15). Use of CSII is associated with im-
provement in quality of life, particularly in
areas related to fear of hypoglycemia and
diabetes distress, compared with multiple
daily injections of insulin (16,17). How-
ever, there is no consensus to guide the
choice of injection or pump therapy in a
given individual, and research to guide
this decision-making is needed (4). Inte-
gration of continuous glucose monitoring
(CGM) into the treatment plan soon after
diagnosis improves glycemic outcomes,
decreases hypoglycemic events, and im-
proves quality of life for individuals with
type 1 diabetes (18–23). Its use is now
considered standard of care for most peo-
ple with type 1 diabetes (4) (see Section 7,
“Diabetes Technology”). Reduction of noc-
turnal hypoglycemia in individuals with
type 1 diabetes using insulin pumps with
CGM is improved by automatic suspension
of insulin delivery at a preset glucose level,
with further improvements when using de-
vices with predictive low glucose insulin
delivery suspension (24,25).
Automated insulin delivery (AID) systems
are safe and effective for people with type
1 diabetes. Randomized controlled trials
and real-world studies have demonstrated
the ability of commercially available sys-
tems to improve achievement of glycemic
goals while reducing the risk of hypoglyce-
mia (26–31). Data are emerging on the
safety and effectiveness of do-it-yourself
systems (32,33). Evidence suggests that an
AID hybrid closed-loop system is superior
to AID sensor-augmented pump therapy
for increased percentage of time in range
and reduction of hypoglycemia (34,35).
Intensive insulin management using a
version of CSII and CGM should be consid-
ered in individuals with type 1 diabetes
whenever feasible. AID systems are pre-
ferred and should be considered for indi-
viduals with type 1 diabetes who are
capable of using the device safely (either
by themselves or with a caregiver) to im-
prove time in range and reduce A1C and
hypoglycemia (26,28–31,36–42). When
choosing among insulin delivery systems,
individual preferences, cost, insulin type,
dosing plan, and self-management capabil-
ities should be considered. See Section 7,
“Diabetes Technology,” for a full discussion
of insulin delivery devices.
In general, individuals with type 1 dia-
betes require approximately 30–50% of
their daily insulin as basal and the re-
mainder as prandial (43). This proportion
is dependent on a number of factors,
diabetesjournals.org/care
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S159
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

including but not limited to carbohydrate
consumption, age, pregnancy status, and
puberty stage (4,44–48). Total daily insulin
requirements can be estimated based on
weight, with typical doses ranging from
0.4 to 1.0 units/kg/day. Higher amounts
may be required during puberty, menses,
and medical illness. The American Diabe-
tes Association/JDRF Type 1 Diabetes
Sourcebook notes 0.5 units/kg/day as a
typical starting dose in adults with type 1
diabetes who are metabolically stable,
with approximately one-half administered
as prandial insulin given to manage blood
glucose after meals and the remaining
portion as basal insulin to manage glyce-
mia in the periods between meal absorp-
tion (49). Starting doses and those soon
after diagnosis may be higher, if an individ-
ual presents with ketoacidosis, or lower
(0.2–0.6 units/kg), particularly in young
children and those with continued endoge-
nous insulin production (during the partial
remission phase or “honeymoon period,”
or in people who present with type 1 dia-
betes in adulthood) (49–52). This guideline
provides detailed information on intensiﬁ-
cation of therapy to meet individualized
needs. In addition, the American Diabetes
Association(ADA)positionstatement“Type1
Diabetes Management Through the Life
Span” provides a thorough overview of
type 1 diabetes treatment (53).
Typical multidose treatment plans for
individuals with type 1 diabetes combine
premeal use of prandial insulins with a
longer-acting formulation.The long-acting
basal dose is titrated to regulate overnight
and fasting glucose. Postprandial glucose
excursions are best managed by a well-
timed injection or inhalation of prandial
insulin. Prandial insulin should ideally be
administered prior to meal consumption;
however, the optimal time to administer
varies based on the pharmacokinetics of
the formulation (regular, RAA, or inhaled),
the premeal blood glucose level, and carbo-
hydrate consumption. Recommendations
for prandial insulin dose administration
should therefore be individualized. Physio-
logic insulin secretion varies with glycemia,
meal size, meal composition, and tissue de-
mands for glucose. To approach this vari-
ability in people using insulin treatment,
strategies have evolved to adjust prandial
doses based on predicted needs.Thus, edu-
cation on how to adjust prandial insulin to
account for nutritional intake and the cor-
rection dose based on premeal glucose
levels, anticipated activity, and sick-day
management can be effective and should
be offered to most individuals (54–59). Ed-
ucation regarding adjustment of prandial
insulin dose for glycemic trends should be
provided to individuals who are using CGM
alone or an AID system (60–63). Further ad-
justment of prandial insulin doses for nutri-
tional intake of protein and fat, in addition
to carbohydrates, is recommended but may
be more feasible for individuals using CSII
than for those using multiple daily injections
(56). With some AID systems, use of a sim-
pliﬁed meal announcement method may
be an alternative for prandial insulin dosing
(31,64) (see Section 5, “Facilitating Positive
Health Behaviors and Well-being to Im-
prove Health Outcomes,” and Section 7,
“Diabetes Technology”).
Due to the risk of hypoglycemia with
insulin treatment, all individuals with
type 1 diabetes should be prescribed glu-
cagon. Individuals with type 1 diabetes
and/or those in close contact with indi-
viduals with type 1 diabetes should be
educated on the use and administration
of the individual’s prescribed glucagon
product. The glucagon product available
to individuals may differ based on cover-
age and cost, however those that do not
require reconstitution are preferred for
ease of administration (65,66). Clinicians
should routinely review the individual’s ac-
cess to glucagon, as appropriate glucagon
prescribing is low (67,68). See Section 6,
“Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia,”
for additional information on hypoglycemia
and glucagon in individuals with diabetes.
The 2021 ADA/European Association for
the Study of Diabetes (EASD) consensus re-
port on the management of type 1 diabe-
tes in adults summarizes different insulin
plans and glucose monitoring strategies in
individuals with type 1 diabetes (Fig. 9.1
and Table 9.1) (4).
Insulin Administration Technique
Ensuring that individuals and/or caregivers
understand correct insulin administration
technique is important to optimize glyce-
mic management and insulin use safety.
Thus, it is important that insulin be deliv-
ered into the proper tissue in the correct
way. Recommendations have been pub-
lished elsewhere outlining best practices
Greater flexibility
Representative relative attributes of insulin delivery
Representative relative attributes of insulin delivery
approaches in people with type 1 diabetes
approaches in people with type 1 diabetes1
Injected insulin plans
Greater flexibility
Higher costs
Lower risk of
hypoglycemia
Higher costs
Lower risk of
hypoglycemia
Continuous insulin infusion plans
MDI with LAA + RAA or URAA
MDI with NPH + RAA or URAA
MDI with NPH + short-acting (regular) insulin
Automated Insulin delivery systems
Insulin pump therapy without automation
Insulin pump with threshold/
predictive low-glucose suspend
Two daily injections with NPH + short-acting (regular)
insulin or premixed
Less-preferred, alternative injected insulin plans
Figure 9.1—Choices of insulin plans in people with type 1 diabetes. Continuous glucose moni-
toring improves outcomes with injected or infused insulin and is superior to blood glucose
monitoring. Inhaled insulin may be used in place of injectable prandial insulin in the U.S. 1The
number of plus signs (1) is an estimate of relative association of the plan with increased ﬂexi-
bility, lower risk of hypoglycemia, and higher costs between the considered plans. LAA, long-
acting insulin analog; MDI, multiple daily injections; RAA, rapid-acting insulin analog; URAA,
ultra-rapid-acting insulin analog. Adapted from Holt et al. (4).
S160
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

for insulin administration (69). Proper insu-
lin administration technique includes injec-
tion or infusion (for CSII or AID systems)
into appropriate body areas, injection or
infusion site rotation, appropriate care
of injection or infusion sites to avoid
infection or other complications, and
avoidance of intramuscular (IM) insulin
delivery. Selection of method of admin-
istration (vial and syringe, insulin pen,
connected insulin pens/devices, or in-
sulin pumps) will depend on a variety
of individual-speciﬁc factors and needs,
cost and coverage, and individual prefer-
ences. Reassessment of the appropriate
administration technique via whichever
method is used should be completed dur-
ing routine follow-up.
Exogenously delivered insulin should
be injected into subcutaneous tissue, not
intramuscularly. Recommended sites for
insulin administration include the abdo-
men, thigh, buttock, and upper arm. Insu-
lin absorption from IM sites differs from
that in subcutaneous sites and is also
inﬂuenced by the activity of the muscle.
Inadvertent IM injection can lead to un-
predictable insulin absorption and vari-
able effects on glucose and is associated
with frequent and unexplained hypoglyce-
mia.
Risk
for
IM
insulin
delivery
is
increased in younger, leaner individuals
when injecting into the limbs rather than
truncal sites (abdomen and buttocks) and
when using longer needles. Recent evi-
dence supports the use of short needles
(e.g., 4-mm pen needles) as effective and
well tolerated when compared with lon-
ger needles, including a study performed
in adults with obesity (70).
Injection or infusion site rotation is
additionally necessary to avoid lipohy-
pertrophy, an accumulation of subcuta-
neous fat in response to the adipogenic
actions of insulin at a site of multiple
injections. Lipohypertrophy appears as
soft, smooth raised areas several centi-
meters in breadth and can contribute to
erratic insulin absorption, increased gly-
cemic variability, and unexplained hypo-
glycemic episodes. People treated with
insulin and/or caregivers should receive
education about proper injection or infu-
sion site rotation and how to recognize
and avoid areas of lipohypertrophy. As
noted in Table 4.1, examination of insulin
injection sites for the presence of lipohy-
pertrophy, as well as assessment of
administration device use and injection
technique, are key components of a com-
prehensive diabetes medical evaluation
and treatment plan. Proper insulin injec-
tion or infusion technique may lead to
more effective use of this therapy and, as
such, holds the potential for improved
clinical outcomes.
Noninsulin Treatments for Type 1
Diabetes
Injectable and oral glucose-lowering med-
ications have been studied for their efﬁ-
cacy as adjunct to insulin treatment of
type 1 diabetes. Pramlintide is based on
the naturally occurring b-cell peptide
amylin and is approved for use in adults
with type 1 diabetes. Clinical trials have
demonstrated a modest reduction in A1C
(0.3–0.4%) and modest weight loss
(1 kg) with pramlintide (71). Similar results
have been reported for several agents
currently approved only for the treatment
of type 2 diabetes. The addition of met-
formin in adults with type 1 diabetes was
associated with small reductions in body
weight, insulin dose, and lipid levels but
did not sustainably improve A1C (72,73).
The largest clinical trials of glucagon-like
Simplified overview of indications for 
Simplified overview of indications for β-cell replacement therapy in people with type 1 diabetes
-cell replacement therapy in people with type 1 diabetes
Severe diabetic chronic kidney disease
(GFR <30 mL mln−1 [1.73 m]−2)
Hypoglycemia
Hypoglycemia
Ketoacidosis
Ketoacidosis
Impaired kidney function
Impaired kidney function
Simultaneous transplantation
Simultaneous transplantation
Living donor kidney
Living donor kidney
Pancreas after
Pancreas after
kidney
kidney
Islet after
Islet after
kidney
kidney
Simultaneous
Simultaneous
pancreas and
pancreas and
kidney
kidney
Simultaneous
Simultaneous
islet and kidney
islet and kidney
Pancreas
Pancreas
transplantation
transplantation
alone
alone
Islet
Islet
transplantation
transplantation
alone
alone
Intact/stable kidney function
Intact/stable kidney function
Incapacitating problems with exogenous insulin therapy
Incapacitating problems with exogenous insulin therapy
Failure of insulin-based management to prevent acute
Failure of insulin-based management to prevent acute
complications
complications
Hypoglycemia unawareness
Hypoglycemia unawareness
Severe metabolic complications
Balancing surgical risk, metabolic need, and the choice of the individual with diabetes
Figure 9.2—Simpliﬁed overview of indications for b-cell replacement therapy in people with type 1 diabetes.The two main forms of b-cell replace-
ment therapy are whole-pancreas transplantation or islet cell transplantation. b-Cell replacement therapy can be combined with kidney transplan-
tation if the individual has end-stage renal disease, which may be performed simultaneously or after kidney transplantation. All decisions about
transplantation must balance the surgical risk, metabolic need, and the choice of the individual with diabetes. GFR, glomerular ﬁltration rate.
Reprinted from Holt et al. (4).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S161
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Table 9.1—Examples of subcutaneous insulin treatment plans
Plans
Timing and distribution
Advantages
Disadvantages
Adjusting doses
Plans that more closely mimic normal insulin secretion
Insulin pump therapy (also
including AID systems: hybrid
closed-loop, low-glucose
suspend, CGM-augmented
open-loop, BGM-augmented
open-loop)
Basal delivery of URAA or RAA;
generally 30–50% of TDD.
Mealtime and correction: URAA or
RAA by bolus based on ICR and/or
ISF and target glucose, with
premeal insulin 15 min
before eating.
Can adjust basal rates for varying
insulin sensitivity by time of day,
for exercise, and for sick days.
Flexibility in meal timing and
content.
Pump can deliver insulin in
increments of fractions of units.
Potential for integration with CGM
for AID systems.
TIR % highest and TBR % lowest
with: hybrid closed-loop > low-
glucose suspend > CGM-
augmented open-loop > BGM-
augmented open-loop.
Most expensive plan.
Must continuously wear one or more
devices.
Risk of rapid development of ketosis
or DKA with interruption of insulin
delivery.
Potential reactions to adhesives and
site infections.
Most technically complex approach
(harder for people with lower
numeracy or literacy skills).
Mealtime insulin: if carbohydrate
counting is accurate, change ICR if
glucose after meal consistently out
of target.
Correction insulin: adjust ISF and/or
target glucose if correction does
not consistently bring glucose into
range.
Basal rates: adjust based on
overnight, fasting or daytime
glucose outside of activity of
URAA/RAA bolus.
MDI: LAA 1 ﬂexible doses of URAA
or RAA at meals
LAA once daily (insulin detemir or
insulin glargine may require twice-
daily dosing); generally 30–50% of
TDD.
Mealtime and correction: URAA or
RAA based on ICR and/or ISF and
target glucose.
Can use pens for all components.
Flexibility in meal timing and
content.
Insulin analogs cause less
hypoglycemia than human insulins.
At least four daily injections.
Most costly insulins.
Smallest increment of insulin is
1 unit (0.5 unit with some pens).
LAAs may not cover strong dawn
phenomenon (rise in glucose in
early morning hours) as well as
pump therapy.
Mealtime insulin: if carbohydrate
counting is accurate, change ICR if
glucose after meal consistently out
of target.
Correction insulin: adjust ISF and/or
target glucose if correction does
not consistently bring glucose into
range.
LAA: based on overnight or fasting
glucose or daytime glucose
outside of activity time course, or
URAA or RAA injections.
MDI plans with less ﬂexibility
Four injections daily with ﬁxed
doses of N and RAA
Pre-breakfast: RAA 20% of TDD.
Pre-lunch: RAA 10% of TDD.
Pre-dinner: RAA 10% of TDD.
Bedtime: N 50% of TDD.
May be feasible if unable to
carbohydrate count.
All meals have RAA coverage.
N is less expensive than LAAs.
Shorter duration RAA may lead to
basal deﬁcit during day; may need
twice-daily N.
Greater risk of nocturnal
hypoglycemia with N.
Requires relatively consistent
mealtimes and carbohydrate
intake.
Pre-breakfast RAA: based on BGM
after breakfast or before lunch.
Pre-lunch RAA: based on BGM after
lunch or before dinner.
Pre-dinner RAA: based on BGM after
dinner or at bedtime.
Evening N: based on fasting or
overnight BGM.
Continued on p. S163
S162
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Table 9.1—Continued
Plans
Timing and distribution
Advantages
Disadvantages
Adjusting doses
Four injections daily with ﬁxed
doses of N and R
Pre-breakfast: R 20% of TDD.
Pre-lunch: R 10% of TDD.
Pre-dinner: R 10% of TDD.
Bedtime: N 50% of TDD.
May be feasible if unable to
carbohydrate count.
R can be dosed based on ICR and
correction.
All meals have R coverage.
Least expensive insulins.
Greater risk of nocturnal
hypoglycemia with N.
Greater risk of delayed post-meal
hypoglycemia with R.
Requires relatively consistent
mealtimes and carbohydrate
intake.
R must be injected at least 30 min
before meal for better effect.
Pre-breakfast R: based on BGM after
breakfast or before lunch.
Pre-lunch R: based on BGM after
lunch or before dinner.
Pre-dinner R: based on BGM after
dinner or at bedtime.
Evening N: based on fasting or
overnight BGM.
Plans with fewer daily injections
Three injections daily: N 1 R or
N 1 RAA
Pre-breakfast: N  40% TDD 1 R or
RAA 15% TDD.
Pre-dinner: R or RAA 15% TDD.
Bedtime: N  30% TDD.
Morning insulins can be mixed in one
syringe.
May be appropriate for those who
cannot take injection in middle of
day.
Morning N covers lunch to some
extent.
Same advantages of RAAs over R.
Least (N 1 R) or less expensive
insulins than MDI with analogs.
Greater risk of nocturnal
hypoglycemia with N than LAAs.
Greater risk of delayed post-meal
hypoglycemia with R than RAAs.
Requires relatively consistent
mealtimes and carbohydrate
intake.
Coverage of post-lunch glucose often
suboptimal.
R must be injected at least 30 min
before meal for better effect.
Morning N: based on pre-dinner
BGM.
Morning R: based on pre-lunch BGM.
Morning RAA: based on post-
breakfast or pre-lunch BGM.
Pre-dinner R: based on bedtime
BGM.
Pre-dinner RAA: based on post-
dinner or bedtime BGM.
Evening N: based on fasting BGM.
Twice-daily “split-mixed”: N 1 R or
N 1 RAA
Pre-breakfast: N  40% TDD 1 R or
RAA 15% TDD.
Pre-dinner: N  30% TDD 1 R or
RAA 15% TDD.
Least number of injections for people
with strong preference for this.
Insulins can be mixed in one syringe.
Least (N 1 R) or less (N 1 RAA)
expensive insulins vs. analogs.
Eliminates need for doses during the
day.
Risk of hypoglycemia in afternoon or
middle of night from N.
Fixed mealtimes and meal content.
Coverage of post-lunch glucose often
suboptimal.
Difﬁcult to reach targets for blood
glucose without hypoglycemia.
Morning N: based on pre-dinner
BGM.
Morning R: based on pre-lunch BGM.
Morning RAA: based on post-
breakfast or pre-lunch BGM.
Evening R: based on bedtime BGM.
Evening RAA: based on post-dinner
or bedtime BGM.
Evening N: based on fasting BGM.
AID, automated insulin delivery; BGM, blood glucose monitoring; CGM, continuous glucose monitoring; ICR, insulin-to-carbohydrate ratio; ISF, insulin sensitivity factor; LAA, long-acting analog; MDI, mul-
tiple daily injections; N, NPH insulin; R, short-acting (regular) insulin; RAA, rapid-acting analog; TBR, time below range; TDD, total daily insulin dose; TIR, time in range; URAA, ultra-rapid-acting analog.
Adapted from Holt et al. (4).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S163
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

peptide 1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs)
in type 1 diabetes have been conducted
with liraglutide 1.8 mg daily, and results
showed modest A1C reductions (0.4%),
decreases in weight (5 kg), and reduc-
tions in insulin doses (74,75). Similarly,
sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2)
inhibitors have been studied in clinical tri-
als in people with type 1 diabetes, and
results showed improvements in A1C, re-
duced body weight, and improved blood
pressure (76); however, SGLT2 inhibitor
use in type 1 diabetes was associated with
an increased rate of DKA. The SGLT1/2 in-
hibitor sotagliﬂozin has been studied in
clinical trials in people with type 1 diabe-
tes, and results showed improvements in
A1C and body weight (77); however, sota-
gliﬂozin use was associated with an eight-
fold increase in DKA compared with
placebo (78). The studies that led to the
approved indication for heart failure (HF)
excluded individuals with type 1 diabetes
or a history of DKA (79,80). See section PRE-
VENTION AND TREATMENT OF HEART FAILURE within
Section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and
Risk Management,” for information on risk
mitigation with the use of SGLT inhibitors
in those with type 1 diabetes. The risks
and beneﬁts of adjunctive agents continue
to be evaluated, with consensus statements
providing guidance on patient selection
and precautions (81).
There are currently no approved thera-
pies for preservation of C-peptide or de-
laying the progression of clinical type 1
diabetes. Higher C-peptide levels have
been associated with better A1C, lower
risk of retinopathy, lower risk of nephropa-
thy, and lower risk of severe hypoglycemia
(82). Several therapies, including verapamil
and monoclonal antibodies, are currently
under active investigation.
SURGICAL TREATMENT FOR TYPE 1
DIABETES
Pancreas and Islet Transplantation
Successful pancreas and islet transplanta-
tion can normalize glucose levels and miti-
gate microvascular complications of type 1
diabetes. However, people receiving these
treatments require lifelong immunosup-
pression to prevent graft rejection and/or
recurrence of autoimmune islet destruc-
tion. Given the potential adverse effects
of immunosuppressive therapy, pancreas
transplantation should be reserved for
people with type 1 diabetes undergoing
simultaneous
kidney
transplantation,
following kidney transplantation, or for
those with recurrent ketoacidosis or se-
vere hypoglycemia despite intensive gly-
cemic management (83). In much of the
world, allogenic islet transplantation is
regulated as an organ transplant. How-
ever, in the U.S., allogenic islet transplan-
tation is regulated as a cell therapy, and
the ﬁrst such allogeneic islet cell therapy,
donislecel-jujn, was approved in 2023.
Donislecel is indicated for the treatment
of adults with type 1 diabetes who are
unable to approach their A1C goal be-
cause of current repeated episodes of
severe hypoglycemia despite intensive
diabetes management and education.
The 2021 ADA/EASD consensus report
on the management of type 1 diabetes
in adults offers a simpliﬁed overview of
indications for b-cell replacement ther-
apy in people with type 1 diabetes (Fig.
9.2) (4).
PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR
ADULTS WITH TYPE 2 DIABETES
Recommendations
9.8 Healthy lifestyle behaviors, dia-
betes self-management education
and support, avoidance of therapeutic
inertia, and social determinants of health
should be considered in the glucose-
lowering management of type 2 dia-
betes. A
9.9 A person-centered shared decision-
making approach should guide the
choice of pharmacologic agents for
adults with type 2 diabetes. Consider
the effects on cardiovascular and re-
nal comorbidities; effectiveness; hypo-
glycemia risk; impact on weight, cost
and access; risk for adverse reactions
and tolerability; and individual prefer-
ences (Fig. 9.3 and Table 9.2). E
9.10 The glucose-lowering treatment
plan should consider approaches that
support weight management goals
(Fig. 9.3 and Table 9.2) for adults with
type 2 diabetes. A
9.11 For adults with type 2 diabetes,
use pharmacological strategiesthat pro-
vide sufﬁcient effectiveness to achieve
and maintain the intended treatment
goals. A
9.12 Treatment modiﬁcation (inten-
siﬁcation or deintensiﬁcation) for
adults not meeting individualized
treatment goals should not be de-
layed. A
9.13 Medication plan and medication-
taking behavior should be reevaluated at
regular intervals (e.g., every 3–6 months)
and adjusted as needed to incorporate
speciﬁc factors that impact choice of
treatment (Fig. 4.1 and Table 9.2). E
9.14 Early combination therapy can
be considered in adults with type 2
diabetes at treatment initiation to
shorten time to attainment of indi-
vidualized treatment goals. A
9.15 In adults with type 2 diabetes
without cardiovascular and/or kidney
disease, pharmacologic agents should
address both the individualized glyce-
mic and weight goals (Fig. 9.3). A
9.16 In adults with type 2 diabetes
who have not achieved their individual-
ized glycemic goals, selection of subse-
quent glucose-lowering agents should
take into consideration the individual-
ized glycemic and weight goals as well
as the presence of other metabolic co-
morbidities and the risk of hypoglyce-
mia. A
9.17 In adults with type 2 diabetes
who have not achieved their individu-
alized weight goals, additional weight
management
interventions
(e.g.,
intensiﬁcation of lifestyle modiﬁca-
tions, structured weight management
programs, pharmacologic agents, or
metabolic surgery, as appropriate) are
recommended. A
9.18 In adults with type 2 diabetes
and established or high risk of ath-
erosclerotic cardiovascular disease,
heart failure (HF), and/or chronic
kidney disease (CKD), the treatment
plan should include agent(s) that re-
duce cardiovascular and kidney disease
risk (e.g., sodium–glucose cotransporter
2 inhibitor [SGLT2] and/or glucagon-like
peptide 1 receptor agonist [GLP-1 RA])
(Fig. 9.3, Table 9.2, Table 10.3B, and
Table 10.3C) for glycemic management
and comprehensive cardiovascular risk
reduction, independent of A1C and in
consideration of person-speciﬁc factors
(Fig. 9.3) (see Section 10, “Cardiovascular
Disease and Risk Management,” for de-
tails on cardiovascular risk reduction rec-
ommendations). A
9.19 In adults with type 2 diabetes
who have HF (with either reduced
or preserved ejection fraction), an
SGLT2 inhibitor is recommended, for
glycemic management and prevention
of HF hospitalizations (see Section 10,
S164
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

“Cardiovascular
Disease
and
Risk
Management,” for details on cardio-
vascular risk reduction recommenda-
tions). A
9.20 In adults with type 2 diabetes
who have CKD (with conﬁrmed esti-
mated glomerular ﬁltration rate [eGFR]
of 20–60 mL/min per 1.73 m2 and/or
albuminuria), an SGLT2 inhibitor should
be used for minimizing progression of
CKD, reduction in cardiovascular events,
and reduction in hospitalizations for HF
(Fig. 9.3); however, the glycemic bene-
ﬁts of SGLT2 inhibitors are reduced at
eGFR <45 mL/min per 1.73 m2 (see
Section 11, “Chronic Kidney Disease and
Risk Management” for details on renal
risk reduction recommendations). A
9.21 In adults with type 2 diabetes
and advanced CKD (eGFR <30 mL/min
per 1.73 m2), a GLP-1 RA is preferred
for glycemic management due to lower
risk of hypoglycemia and for cardiovas-
cular event reduction. B
9.22 In adults with type 2 diabetes,
initiation of insulin should be consid-
ered regardless of background glucose-
lowering therapy or disease stage if
there is evidence of ongoing catabolism
(e.g., unexpected weight loss), if symp-
toms of hyperglycemia are present, or
whenA1Corbloodglucoselevelsarevery
high (i.e., A1C >10% [>86 mmol/mol]
or
blood
glucose
$300
mg/dL
[$16.7 mmol/L]). E
9.23 In adults with type 2 diabetes, a
GLP-1 RA, including a dual glucose-
dependent insulinotropic polypeptide
(GIP) and GLP-1 RA, is preferred to in-
sulin (Fig. 9.4). A
9.24 If insulin is used, combination
therapy with a GLP-1 RA, including a
dual GIP and GLP-1 RA, is recom-
mended for greater glycemic effective-
ness as well as beneﬁcial effects on
weight and hypoglycemia risk for adults
with type 2 diabetes. Insulin dosing
should be reassessed upon addition or
dose escalation of a GLP-1 RA or dual
GIPand GLP-1 RA. A
9.25 In adults with type 2 diabetes,
glucose-lowering agents may be contin-
ued upon initiation of insulin therapy
(unless contraindicated or not tolerated)
for ongoing glycemic and metabolic
beneﬁts (i.e., weight, cardiometabolic,
or kidney beneﬁts). A
9.26 To minimize the risk of hypogly-
cemia and treatment burden when
starting insulin therapy in adults with
type 2 diabetes, reassess the need
for and/or dose of glucose-lowering
agents with higher hypoglycemia risk
(i.e., sulfonylureas and meglitinides). A
9.27 Monitor for signs of overbasaliza-
tion during insulin therapy, such as basal
dose exceeding 0.5 units/kg/day,
signiﬁcant bedtime-to-morning or post-
prandial-to-preprandial glucose differ-
ential, occurrences of hypoglycemia
(aware or unaware), and high glycemic
variability.When overbasalization is sus-
pected, a thorough reevaluation should
occur promptly to further tailor therapy
to the individual’s needs. E
9.28 Routinely assess all people with
diabetes for ﬁnancial obstacles that
could impede their diabetes manage-
ment. Clinicians, members of the dia-
betes care team, and social services
professionals should work collabora-
tively, as appropriate and feasible, to
support these individuals by imple-
menting strategies to reduce costs,
thereby improving their access to
evidence-based care. E
9.29 In adults with diabetes and cost-
related barriers, consider use of lower-
cost medications for glycemic manage-
ment (i.e., metformin, sulfonylureas,
thiazolidinediones, and human insulin)
within the context of their risks for hy-
poglycemia, weight gain, cardiovascular
and kidney events, and other adverse
effects. E
The ADA/EASD consensus report “Man-
agement of Hyperglycemia in Type 2 Dia-
betes, 2022” (84) recommends a holistic,
multifaceted, person-centered approach
accounting for the complexity of managing
type2 diabetesand itscomplicationsacross
the life span. Person-speciﬁc factorsthat af-
fect choice of treatment include individu-
alized glycemic goals (see Section 6,
“Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia”), in-
dividualized weight goals, the individual’s
risk for hypoglycemia, and the individual’s
history of or risk factors for cardiovascular,
kidney, liver, and other comorbidities and
complications of diabetes (see Section 4,
“Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and
Assessment of Comorbidities,” Section
10, “Cardiovascular Disease and Risk
Management,” and Section 11 “Chronic
Kidney Disease and Risk Management”).
In addition,treatment decisions must con-
sider the tolerability and side effect
proﬁles of medications, complexity of the
medication plan and the individual’s ca-
pacity to implement it given their speciﬁc
situation and context, and the access, cost,
and availability of medication. Lifestyle
modiﬁcations and health behaviors that
improve health (see Section 5, “Facilitating
Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
to Improve Health Outcomes”) should be
emphasized along with any pharmacologic
therapy. Section 13, “Older Adults,” and
Section 14, “Children and Adolescents,”
have recommendations speciﬁc for older
adults and for children and adolescents
with type 2 diabetes, respectively. Sec-
tion 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and Risk
Management,” and Section 11, “Chronic
Kidney Disease and Risk Management,”
have recommendations for the use of
glucose-lowering drugs in the manage-
ment of cardiovascular disease and kid-
ney disease, respectively.
Choice of Glucose-Lowering Therapy
Healthy lifestyle behaviors, diabetes self-
management, education, and support,
avoidance of clinical inertia, and social de-
terminants of health should be considered
in the glucose-lowering management of
type 2 diabetes. Pharmacologic therapy
should be guided by person-centered
treatment factors, including comorbidities
and treatment goals and preferences.
Pharmacotherapy should be started at the
time type 2 diabetes is diagnosed unless
there are contraindications. Pharmaco-
logic approaches that provide the efﬁcacy
to achieve treatment goals should be con-
sidered, such as metformin or otheragents,
including combination therapy, that pro-
vide adequate efﬁcacy to achieve and
maintain treatment goals (84). In adults
with type 2 diabetes and established/high
risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular dis-
ease (ASCVD), HF, and/or chronic kidney
disease (CKD), the treatment plan should
include agents that reduce cardiovascular
and kidney disease risk (see Fig. 9.3, Table
9.2, Section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and
RiskManagement,” andSection11,“Chronic
Kidney Disease and Risk Management”). In
general, higher-efﬁcacy approaches have
greater likelihood of achieving glycemic
goals, with the following considered to
have very high efﬁcacy for glucose lower-
ing: the GLP-1 RAs dulaglutide (high dose)
and semaglutide,thedualglucose-depend-
ent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) and
GLP-1 RA tirzepatide, insulin, combination
diabetesjournals.org/care
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S165
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

	

		
	
	

Figure 9.3—Use ofglucose-lowering medications in the management of type 2 diabetes. ACEi, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ACR, albumin-to-creatinine ratio; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardio-
vascular disease; CGM, continuous glucose monitoring; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CV, cardiovascular; CVD, cardiovasculardisease; CVOT, cardiovascular outcomes trial; DPP-4i, dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitor; eGFR, estimated glomerular
ﬁltration rate; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptoragonist; HF, heart failure; HFpEF, heart failure with preserved ejection fraction; HFrEF, heart failure with reduced ejection fraction; HHF, hospitalization for heart failure; MACE, major
adverse cardiovascular events; MI, myocardial infarction; SDOH, social determinants of health; SGLT2i, sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor; T2D,type 2 diabetes; TZD,thiazolidinedione. Adapted from Davies et al. (84).
S166
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Table 9.2—Medications for lowering glucose, summary of characteristics
 Dual
CV, cardiovascular; CVOT, cardiovascular outcomes trial; DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis; DKD, diabetic kidney disease; DPP-4, dipeptidyl peptidase 4; eGFR, estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate; GI, gas-
trointestinal; GIP, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; HF, heart failure; NASH, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis; MACE, major adverse car-
diovascular events; SGLT2, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2; SQ, subcutaneous; T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus. *For agent-speciﬁc dosing recommendations, please refer to manufacturers’
prescribing information. 1Tsapas et al. (104). 2Tsapas et al. (152). Adapted from Davies et al. (84).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S167
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

oral therapy, and combination injectable
therapy. Weight management is a distinct
treatment goal, along with glycemic man-
agement, in individuals with type 2 dia-
betes, as it has multifaceted beneﬁts, in-
cluding improved glycemic management,
reduction in hepatic steatosis, and im-
provement in cardiovascular risk factors
(84–86). The glucose-lowering treatment
plan should therefore consider approaches
that support weight management goals,
with semaglutide and tirzepatide cur-
rently having the highest weight loss efﬁ-
cacy among agents approved for glycemic
management (Fig. 9.3 and Table 9.2)
(84,87,88). Additional weight manage-
ment approaches, alone or in combina-
tion, should be used if needed to achieve
individual goals (i.e., intensive behavioral
management programs, weight loss phar-
macotherapies, or metabolic surgery).
See Section 8, “Obesity and Weight
Management,” for approaches to achieve
weight management goals.
Metformin is effective and safe, is in-
expensive and widely available, and may
reduce risk of cardiovascular events and
death (89). Metformin is available in an
immediate-release form for twice-daily
dosing or as an extended-release form
that can be given once daily. Compared
with sulfonylureas, metformin as ﬁrst-
line therapy has beneﬁcial effects on
A1C, is weight neutral, does not cause
hypoglycemia, and reduces cardiovascu-
lar mortality (90).
The principal side effects of metformin
are gastrointestinal intolerance due to
bloating, abdominal discomfort, and diar-
rhea; these can be mitigated by gradual
dose titration and/or using extended-
release formulation. The drug is cleared
by renal ﬁltration, and very high circulat-
ing levels (e.g., as a result of overdose or
acute renal failure) have been associated
with lactic acidosis. However, the occur-
rence of this complication is now known
to be very rare, and metformin may be
safely used in people with estimated glo-
merular ﬁltration rate $30 mL/min/1.73 m2
(91). A randomized trial conﬁrmed previ-
ous observations that metformin use is
associated with vitamin B12 deﬁciency
and worsening of symptoms of neuropa-
thy (92). This is compatible with a report
from the Diabetes Prevention Program
Outcomes Study (DPPOS) suggesting peri-
odic testing of vitamin B12 levels (93)
(see Section 3, “Prevention or Delay of
Diabetes and Associated Comorbidities”)
in individuals treated with metformin for
an extended period of time.
When A1C is $1.5% above the indi-
vidualized glycemic goal (see Section 6,
“Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia,” for
appropriate goals), many individuals will
require dual-combination therapy or a
more potent glucose-lowering agent to
achieve and maintain their goal A1C level
(84,94) (Fig. 9.3 and Table 9.2). Insulin has
the advantage of being effective where
other agents are not and should be consid-
ered as part of any combination medica-
tion plan when hyperglycemia is severe,
especially if catabolic features (weight loss,
hypertriglyceridemia, ketosis) are present.
It is common practice to initiate insulin
therapy for people who present with
blood glucose levels $300 mg/dL ($16.7
mmol/L) or A1C >10% (>86 mmol/mol)
or if the individual has symptoms of hyper-
glycemia (i.e., polyuria or polydipsia) or ev-
idence of catabolism (unexpected weight
loss) (Fig. 9.4). As glucose toxicity resolves,
simplifying the medication plan and/or
changing to noninsulin agents is often pos-
sible. However, there is evidence that peo-
ple with poorly managed hyperglycemia
associated with type 2 diabetes can also
be effectively treated with a sulfonylurea,
GLP-1 RA, or dual GIP and GLP-1 RA
(87,88,95). GLP-1 RAs and tirzepatide have
additional beneﬁts over insulin and sulfo-
nylureas, speciﬁcally lower risk for hypogly-
cemia (both) and favorable weight (both),
cardiovascular (GLP-1 RAs), and kidney
(GLP-1 RAs) end points.
Combination Therapy
Because type 2 diabetes is a progressive
disease in many individuals, maintenance
of glycemic goals often requires combina-
tion therapy.Traditional recommendations
have been to use stepwise addition of
medications to metformin to maintain goal
A1C. The advantage of this is to provide a
clear assessment of the positive and nega-
tive effects of new drugs and reduce po-
tential side effects and expense (96).
However, there are data to support initial
combination therapy for more rapid attain-
ment of glycemic goals (97,98) and later
combination therapy for longer durability
of glycemic effect (99). The VERIFY (Vilda-
gliptin Efﬁcacy in combination with met-
formin For earlY treatment of type 2
diabetes) trial demonstrated that initial
combination therapy—in this case of met-
formin and the dipeptidyl peptidase 4
(DPP-4) inhibitor vildagliptin—is superior
to sequential addition of medications for
extending primary and secondary failure
(100). Initial combination therapy should
be considered in people presenting with
A1C levels 1.5–2.0% above goal. Finally,
incorporation of high-glycemic-efﬁcacy
therapies or therapies for cardiovascular
and kidney disease risk reduction (e.g.,
GLP-1 RAs, dual GIP and GLP-1 RA, and
SGLT2 inhibitors) may allow for weaning of
the current medication plan, particularly of
agents that may increase the risk of hypo-
glycemia and weight gain. Thus, treatment
intensiﬁcation may not necessarily follow a
pure sequential addition of therapy but in-
stead reﬂect a tailoring of the medication
plan in alignment with person-centered
treatment goalsand pursuit of multifaceted
treatment goals (Fig. 9.3).
Treatment intensiﬁcation, deintensiﬁca-
tion, or modiﬁcation—as appropriate—for
people not meeting individualized treat-
ment goals should not be delayed. Shared
decision-making is important in discussions
regarding treatment change. The choice
of medication added to initial therapy is
based on the clinical characteristics of the
individual and their preferences and goals
for care. Important clinical characteristics
include the presence of overweight or obe-
sity, established ASCVD or indicators of
high ASCVD risk, HF, CKD, obesity, nonalco-
holic fatty liver disease or nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis, hypoglycemia, and risk for
speciﬁc adverse drug effects, as well as
safety, tolerability, accessibility, usability,
and cost. Results from comparative effec-
tiveness meta-analyses suggest that each
new class of oral noninsulin agents added
to initial therapy with metformin gener-
ally lowers A1C approximately 0.7–1.0%
(8–11 mmol/mol); if a GLP-1 RA or the
dual GIP and GLP-1 RA is added, a 1
to $2% lowering in A1C is expected
(87,101,102) (Fig. 9.3 and Table 9.2).
For people with type 2 diabetes and
established ASCVD or indicators of high
ASCVD risk, HF, or CKD, an SGLT2 inhibi-
tor and/or GLP-1 RA with demonstrated
cardiovascular beneﬁt (see Table 9.2,
Table 10.3B, and Table 10.3C) is recom-
mended as part of the glucose-lowering
plan independent of A1C, independent
of metformin use, and in consideration
of person-speciﬁc factors (Fig. 9.3). Indi-
viduals with these comorbidities already
achieving their individualized glycemic
goals with other medications may bene-
ﬁt from switching to these preferred
S168
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

medications, if possible, to reduce risk
of ASCVD, HF, and/or CKD in addition to
achieving glycemic goals (see Section
10, “Cardiovascular Disease and Risk
Management” and Section 11, “Chronic
Kidney Disease and Risk Management”).
This is particularly important as SGLT2
inhibitors and GLP-1 RA are associated
with lower risk of hypoglycemia and in-
dividuals with ASCVD, HF, and CKD ex-
perience heightened hypoglycemia risk.
For people without established ASCVD,
indicators of high ASCVD risk, HF, or CKD,
medication choice is guided by efﬁcacy in
support of individualized glycemic and
weight management goals, avoidance of
side effects (particularly hypoglycemia
and weight gain), cost/access, and individ-
ual preferences (103). A systematic review
and network meta-analysis suggests that
the greatest reductions in A1C level are
with insulin plans, speciﬁc GLP-1 RAs
(particularly semaglutide), and tirzepatide
(87,88,104). In all cases, treatment plans
need to be continuously reviewed for efﬁ-
cacy, side effects, and burden (Table 9.2).
In some instances, the individual will re-
quire medication reduction or discontinu-
ation. Common reasons for this include
ineffectiveness, hypoglycemia, intolerable
side effects, new contraindications, ex-
pense, or a change in glycemic goals (e.g.,
in response to development of comorbid-
ities orchanges in treatment goals). Section
13, “Older Adults,” has a full discussion of
treatment considerations in older adults, in
whom changes of glycemic goals and de-
escalation of therapy are common.
The need for the greater potency of
injectable medications is common, par-
ticularly in people with a longer dura-
tion of diabetes. The addition of basal
insulin, either human NPH or one of the
long-acting insulin analogs, to oral agent
medication plans is a well-established
approach that is effective for many indi-
viduals. In addition, evidence supports
the utility of GLP-1 RAs in people not at-
taining their glycemic goals. While most
GLP-1 RAs are injectable, an oral formu-
lation of semaglutide is commercially
available (105). In trials comparing the
addition of an injectable GLP-1 RA, dual
GIP and GLP-1 RA, or insulin in people
needing further glucose lowering, glyce-
mic efﬁcacies of injectable GLP-1 RA
and dual GIP and GLP-1 RA were similar
to or greater than that of basal insulin
(106–113). GLP-1 RAs and dual GIP and
GLP-1 RA in these trials had a lower risk
of hypoglycemia and beneﬁcial effects
on body weight compared with insulin,
albeit with greater gastrointestinal side
effects. Thus, trial results support high
potency GLP-1 RAs and dual GIP and
GLP-1 RA as the preferred options for
individuals requiring the potency of an
injectable therapy for glucose manage-
ment (Fig. 9.4). In individuals who are in-
tensiﬁed to insulin therapy, combination
therapy with a GLP-1 RA or a dual GIP
and GLP-1 RA has been shown to have
greater efﬁcacy and durability of glycemic
treatment effect, as well as weight and
hypoglycemia beneﬁt, than treatment in-
tensiﬁcation with insulin alone (84,114).
However, cost and tolerability issues are
important considerations in GLP-1 RA and
dual GIPand GLP-1 RA use.
Costs for diabetes medications have in-
creased dramatically over the past two
decades, and an increasing proportion is
now passed on to people with diabetes
and their families (115). Table 9.3 provides
cost information for currently approved
noninsulin therapies. Of note, prices listed
are average wholesale prices (AWP) (116)
and National Average Drug Acquisition
Costs (NADAC) (117), separate measures
to allow for a comparison of drug prices,
but do not account for discounts, rebates,
or other price adjustments often involved
in prescription sales that affect the actual
cost incurred by the individual. Medication
costs can be a major source of stress for
people with diabetes and contribute to
worse medication-taking behavior (118);
cost-reducing strategies may improve medi-
cation-taking behavior in some cases (119).
Although caps on costs are starting to occur
for insulin products, no such caps exist for
diabetes durable medical equipment or for
noninsulin medications. It is therefore es-
sential to screen all people with diabetes
for ﬁnancial concerns and cost-related bar-
riers to care and to engage members of the
health care team—including pharmacists,
certiﬁed diabetes care and education spe-
cialists, social workers, community health
workers, community paramedics, and
others—to identify cost-saving opportuni-
ties for medications, diabetes durable
medical equipment, and glucagon (120).
Cardiovascular Outcomes Trials
There are now multiple large randomized
controlled trials reporting statistically sig-
niﬁcant reductions in cardiovascularevents
in adults with type 2 diabetes treated
with an SGLT2 inhibitor or GLP-1 RA; see
Section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and
Risk Management,” for details. Partici-
pants enrolled in many of the cardiovas-
cular outcomes trials had A1C $6.5%
($48 mmol/mol), with more than 70%
taking metformin at baseline, with analy-
ses indicating beneﬁt with or without met-
formin (84). Thus, a practical extension of
these results to clinical practice is to use
these medications preferentially in people
with type 2 diabetes and established
ASCVD or indicators of high ASCVD risk.
For these individuals, incorporating one
of the SGLT2 inhibitors and/or GLP-1 RAs
that have been demonstrated to have
cardiovascular disease beneﬁt is rec-
ommended (see Fig. 9.3, Table 9.2, and
Section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease
and Risk Management”). Emerging data
suggest that use of both classes of drugs
will provide additional cardiovascular and
kidney outcomes beneﬁt; thus, combina-
tion therapy with an SGLT2 inhibitor and a
GLP-1 RA may be considered to provide
the complementary outcomes beneﬁts as-
sociated with these classes of medication
(121). In cardiovascular outcomes trials,
empagliﬂozin, canagliﬂozin, dapagliﬂozin,
liraglutide, semaglutide, and dulaglutide all
had beneﬁcial effects on indices of CKD,
while dedicated renal outcomes studies
have demonstrated beneﬁt of speciﬁc
SGLT2 inhibitors. See Section 11, “Chronic
Kidney Disease and Risk Management,”
for discussion of how CKD may impact
treatment choices. Additional large ran-
domized trials of other agents in these
classes are ongoing.
Individuals at low risk for ASCVD may
beneﬁt from GLP-1 RA therapy to reduce
their risk of future ASCVD events, although
the evidence is currently limited. The Gly-
cemia Reduction Approaches in Type 2
Diabetes: A Comparative Effectiveness
Study (GRADE), which was designed to
examine the comparative effectiveness of
insulin glargine U-100, glimepiride, liraglu-
tide, and sitagliptin in individuals with
short duration of diabetes with respect to
achieving and maintaining glycemic con-
trol, found that individuals treated with
liraglutide had a slightly lower risk of car-
diovascular disease compared with individ-
uals receiving the other three treatments
(hazard ratio 0.7 [95% CI 0.6–0.9]), al-
though no signiﬁcant differences were
found for major adverse cardiovascular
events, hospitalization for HF, or cardiovas-
cular death (122).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S169
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Insulin Therapy
Many adults with type 2 diabetes even-
tually require and beneﬁt from insulin
therapy (Fig. 9.4). See the section INSULIN
ADMINISTRATION TECHNIQUE, above, for guid-
ance on how to administer insulin safely
and effectively. The progressive nature
of type 2 diabetes should be regularly
and objectively explained to individuals
with diabetes, and clinicians should
avoid using insulin as a threat or de-
scribing it as a sign of personal failure
or punishment. Rather, the utility and
importance of insulin to maintain glyce-
mic control once progression of the dis-
ease overcomes the effect of other
agents should be emphasized. Educat-
ing and involving people with diabetes
in insulin management is beneﬁcial. For
example, instruction of individuals with
type 2 diabetes initiating insulin in self-
titration of insulin doses based on glu-
cose
monitoring
improves
glycemic
management (123). Comprehensive ed-
ucation regarding blood glucose moni-
toring, nutrition, and the avoidance and
appropriate treatment of hypoglycemia
are critically important in any individual
using insulin.
Basal Insulin
Basal insulin alone is the most convenient
initial insulin treatment and can be added
to metformin and other noninsulin inject-
ables for individuals with type 2 diabetes.
Starting doses can be estimated based on
body weight (0.1–0.2 units/kg/day) and
the degree of hyperglycemia, with indi-
vidualized titration over days to weeks as
needed.The principal action of basal insu-
lin is to restrain hepatic glucose produc-
tion and limit hyperglycemia overnight
and between meals (124,125). Attain-
ment of fasting glucose goals can be
achieved with human NPH insulin or a
long-acting insulin analog. In clinical trials,
long-acting basal analogs (U-100 glargine
or detemir) have been demonstrated to
reduce the risk of level 2 hypoglycemia and
nocturnal hypoglycemia compared with
NPH insulin (126). Longer-acting basal ana-
logs (U-300 glargine or degludec) convey a
lower nocturnal hypoglycemia risk com-
pared with U-100 glargine (127,128). Clini-
cians should be aware of the potential
for overbasalization with insulin therapy.
Clinical signals that may prompt evalua-
tion of overbasalization include basal
dose greater than 0.5 units/kg, high
bedtime-to-morning or preprandial-to-
postprandial glucose differential (e.g.,
bedtime-to-morning glucose differential
$50 mg/dL [$2.8 mmol/L]), hypoglyce-
mia (aware or unaware), and high vari-
ability.
Indication
of
overbasalization
should prompt reevaluation to further in-
dividualize therapy (129).
The cost of insulin has been rising
steadily over the past two decades, at a
pace severalfold that of other medical
expenditures. This expense contributes
signiﬁcant burden to people with diabe-
tes, as insulin has become a growing
“out-of-pocket” cost for people with di-
abetes, and direct costs contribute to
decrease in medication-taking behavior
(130). As of January 2023, the cost of
individual insulins was capped for en-
rollees in Medicare Part D plans (131),
and at least 20 states and the District of
Columbia have also capped insulin costs
for enrollees in state-sponsored plans
and, in select states, for those without
insurance. In 2023, the three major U.S.
insulin manufacturers also announced
plans to reduce insulin prices; some
plans go into effect in January 2024,
and another has already occurred. The
summary of the cost of insulin products
in Table 9.4 provides a comparison but
is not reﬂective of the Medicare or
state-level caps or the recent manufac-
turer price reductions. However, the in-
formation in Table 9.4 reﬂects how the
approval of unbranded versions (insulin
aspart, lispro, degludec, glargine U-100,
and some premixed products), follow-
on products (insulin lispro and glargine),
and interchangeable biosimilars (insulin
glargine) have led to lower costs com-
pared with other products. For some in-
dividuals with type 2 diabetes (e.g.,
individuals with relaxed A1C goals, low
rates of hypoglycemia, and prominent
insulin resistance as well as those with
cost concerns), human insulin (NPH and
regular) may be the appropriate choice
of therapy, and clinicians should be fa-
miliar with its use (132). Human regular
insulin, NPH, and 70/30 NPH/regular
products can be purchased for consider-
ably less than the AWP and NADAC prices
listed in Table 9.4 at select pharmacies. It
is important to note that although these
caps, price reductions, use of unbranded
or biosimilar versions of analogs, or use
of human insulins may impact the cost
of insulin products, there are no caps on
the costs of the other tools individuals
with diabetes need for monitoring or
treatment (including glucose monitoring
supplies [strips or sensors], administration
tools [pen needles, syringes, and insulin
pumps], ketone testing supplies, and glu-
cagon). Therefore, routine assessment of
ﬁnancial obstacles that may impact diabe-
tes management is an important compo-
nent of effective care of people with
diabetes. Collaboration between mem-
bers of the health care team and with so-
cial service professionals to identify and
implement cost reduction strategies to
support and improve access to evidence-
based care is important (120,130).
Prandial Insulin
Many individuals with type 2 diabetes
require doses of insulin before meals, in
addition to basal insulin, to reach glyce-
mic goals. If an individual is not already
being treated with a GLP-1 RA or dual
GIP and GLP-1 RA, a GLP-1 RA (either as
an individual product or in a ﬁxed-ratio
combination with a basal insulin prod-
uct) or dual GIP and GLP-1 RA should be
considered prior to prandial insulin to
further address prandial control and to
minimize the risks of hypoglycemia and
weight gain associated with insulin ther-
apy (84,114). For individuals who ad-
vance to prandial insulin, a prandial
insulin dose of 4 units or 10% of the
amount of basal insulin at the largest
meal or the meal with the greatest
postprandial excursion is a safe estimate
for initiating therapy. The prandial insu-
lin plan can then be intensiﬁed based
on individual needs (Fig. 9.4). Individu-
als with type 2 diabetes are generally
more insulin resistant than those with
type 1 diabetes, require higher daily
doses (1 unit/kg), and have lower
rates of hypoglycemia (133). Titration
can be based on home self-monitored
blood glucose or CGM. When signiﬁcant
additions to the prandial insulin dose
are made, particularly with the evening
meal, consideration should be given to
decreasing basal insulin. Meta-analyses
of trials comparing rapid-acting insulin
analogs with human regular insulin in
type 2 diabetes have not reported im-
portant differences in A1C or hypoglyce-
mia (134,135).
Concentrated Insulins
Several concentrated insulin prepara-
tions are currently available. U-500 reg-
ular insulin is, by deﬁnition, ﬁve times
more concentrated than U-100 regular
S170
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

1. Consider insulin as the ﬁrst injectable if evidence of ongoing catabolism is present, symptoms of hyperglycemia are present, when A1C or blood glucose levels are very high (i.e., A1C >10%
    [>86 mmol/mol] or blood glucose ≥300 mg/dL [≥16.7 mmol/L]), or when a diagnosis of type 1 diabetes is a possibility.
2. When selecting  GLP-1 RAs, consider individual preference, A1C lowering, weight-lowering effect, or frequency of injection. If CVO is present. consider GLP-1 RA with proven CVO beneﬁt. Oral or
    injectable GLP-1 RAs are appropriate.
3. For people on GLP-1 RA and basal Insulin combination, consider use of a ﬂxed-ratio combination product (IDegLira or iGlarLixi).
4. Consider switching from evening NPH to a basal analog if the individual develops hypoglycemia and/or frequently forgets to administer NPH in the evening and would be better managed
    wtth an A.M. dose of a long-acting basal Insulin.
5. If adding prandial insulin to NPH, consider initiation of a self-mixed or premixed insulin plan to decrease the number of injections required.
Figure 9.4—Intensifying to injectable therapies in type 2 diabetes. DSMES, diabetes self-management education and support; FPG, fasting plasma
glucose; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; dual GIP and GLP-1 RA, dual glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide and glucagon-
like peptide 1 receptor agonist; max, maximum; PPG, postprandial glucose. Adapted from Davies et al. (151).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S171
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

insulin. U-500 regular insulin has distinct
pharmacokinetics with similar onset but a
delayed, blunted, and prolonged peak ef-
fect and longer duration of action com-
pared with U-100 regular insulin; thus, it
has characteristics more like a premixed
intermediate-acting (NPH) and regular in-
sulin product and can be used as two or
three daily injections (136,137). U-300
glargine and U-200 degludec are three
and two times as concentrated as their
U-100 formulations, respectively, and al-
low higher doses of basal insulin adminis-
tration per volume used. U-300 glargine
has a longer duration of action than
U-100 glargine but modestly lower efﬁ-
cacy per unit administered (138–140).
The U-200 formulations of insulin deglu-
dec, insulin lispro, and insulin lispro-aabc
have similar pharmacokinetics to their
U-100
counterparts
(141–143).
These
concentrated preparations may be more
convenient (fewer injections to achieve
target dose) and comfortable (less volume
to inject target dose and/or less injection
effort) for individuals and may improve
treatment plan engagement in those with
insulin resistance who require large doses
of insulin. While U-500 regular insulin is
available in both preﬁlled pens and vials,
other concentrated insulins are avail-
able only in preﬁlled pens to minimize
the risk of dosing errors. If U-500
Table 9.3—Median monthly (30-day) AWP and NADAC of maximum approved daily dose of noninsulin glucose-lowering
agents in the U.S.
Class
Compound(s)
Dosage strength/
product (if applicable)
Median AWP
(min, max)*
Median NADAC
(min, max)*
Maximum approved
daily dose†
Biguanides
 Metformin
500 mg (ER)
850 mg (IR)
1,000 mg (IR)
1,000 mg (ER)
500 mg (Sol)
$89 ($45, $6,719)
$108 ($5, $189)
$87 ($3, $144)
$1,884 ($242, $7,214)
$405 ($405, $739)
$5
$2
$2
$31 ($31, $226)
$535
2,000 mg
2,550 mg
2,000 mg
2,000 mg
2,000 mg
Sulfonylureas (2nd
generation)
 Glimepiride
 Glipizide
 Glyburide
4 mg
10 mg (IR)
10 mg (XL/ER)
6 mg (micronized)
5 mg
$73 ($72, $198)
$72 ($67, $91)
$48 ($46, $48)
$54 ($48, $71)
$82 ($63, $432)
$3
$6
$10
$12
$8
8 mg
40 mg
20 mg
12 mg
20 mg
Thiazolidinedione
 Pioglitazone
45 mg
$348 ($7, $349)
$4
45 mg
a-Glucosidase inhibitors
 Acarbose
 Miglitol
100 mg
100 mg
$106 ($104, $378)
$294 ($241, $346)
$27
NA
300 mg
300 mg
Meglitinides
 Nateglinide
 Repaglinide
120 mg
2 mg
$155
$878 ($58, $897)
$27
$31
360 mg
16 mg
DPP-4 inhibitors
 Alogliptin
 Linagliptin
 Saxagliptin
 Sitagliptin
25 mg
5 mg
5 mg
100 mg
$234
$630
$524
$657
$161
$504
$466
$525
25 mg
5 mg
5 mg
100 mg
SGLT2 inhibitors
 Canagliﬂozin
 Dapagliﬂozin
 Empagliﬂozin
 Ertugliﬂozin
300 mg
10 mg
25 mg
15 mg
$718
$678
$712
$408
$574
$543
$569
$328
300 mg
10 mg
25 mg
15 mg
GLP-1 RAs
 Dulaglutide
4.5 mg pen
$1,117
$895
4.5 mg‡
 Exenatide
10 mg pen
$964
$771
20 mg
 Exenatide
(extended release)
2 mg pen
$990
$793
2 mg‡
 Liraglutide
1.8 mg pen
$1,340
$1,072
1.8 mg
 Semaglutide
1 mg pen
$1,123
$903
2 mg‡
14 mg (tablet)
$1,097 ($1,070, $1,123)
$899
14 mg
Dual GIP and GLP-1
receptor agonist
 Tirzepatide
15 mg pen
$1,228
$982
15 mg‡
Bile acid sequestrant
 Colesevelam
625 mg tabs
3.75 g suspension
$711 ($674, $712)
$674 ($673, $675)
$64
$130
3.75 g
3.75 g
Dopamine-2 agonist
 Bromocriptine
0.8 mg
$1,200
$965
4.8 mg
Amylin mimetic
 Pramlintide
120 mg pen
$2,866
NA
120 mg/injection§
AWP, average wholesale price; DPP-4, dipeptidyl peptidase 4; ER and XL, extended release; GIP, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide;
GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; IR, immediate release; max, maximum; min, minimum; NA, data not available; NADAC,
National Average Drug Acquisition Cost; SGLT2, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2. AWP and NADAC prices as of July 2023. *Calculated for
30-day supply (AWP [116] or NADAC [117] unit price × number of doses required to provide maximum approved daily dose × 30 days); me-
dian AWP or NADAC listed alone when only one product and/or price. †Used to calculate median AWP and NADAC (min, max); generic prices
used, if available commercially. Prices for bexagliﬂozin were not available at the time of this update. ‡Administered once weekly. §AWP and
NADAC calculated based on 120 mg three times daily.
S172
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

regular insulin vials are prescribed, the
prescription should be accompanied by
a prescription for U-500 syringes to
minimize the risk of dosing errors.
Alternative Insulin Routes
Insulin is primarily administered via sub-
cutaneous injection or infusion. Adminis-
tration devices provide some additional
variation in the subcutaneous delivery
beyond vial versus insulin pen.Those de-
vices include continuous insulin pumps
(programmable basal and bolus settings
and ﬁxed basal and bolus settings) and
bolus-only insulin patch pump. In addition,
prandial or correction insulin doses may be
administered using inhaled human insulin.
Inhaled insulin is available as monomers of
regular human insulin; studies in individuals
with type 1 diabetes suggest that inhaled
insulin has pharmacokinetics similar to RAA
(7). Studies comparing inhaled insulin with
injectable insulin have demonstrated its
fasteronsetand shorterduration compared
with the RAA insulin lispro, as well as clini-
cally meaningful A1C reductions and weight
reductions compared with the RAA insulin
aspart over 24 weeks (144–146). Use of in-
haled insulin may result in a decline in lung
function (reduced forced expiratory volume
in 1second[FEV1]).Inhaledinsuliniscontra-
indicated in individuals with chronic lung
disease, such as asthma and chronic ob-
structive pulmonary disease, and is not rec-
ommended in individuals who smoke or
who recently stopped smoking. All individu-
als require spirometry (FEV1) testing to
identify potential lung disease prior to and
afterstarting inhaled insulin therapy.
Table 9.4—Median cost of insulin products in the U.S. calculated as AWP and NADAC per 1,000 units of speciﬁed dosage
form/product
Insulins
Compounds
Dosage form/product
Median AWP
(min, max)*
Median
NADAC*
Rapid-acting
 Aspart
U-100 vial
$174†
$139†
U-100 cartridge
$215†
$172†
U-100 preﬁlled pen
$224†
$179†
 Aspart (“faster acting product”)
U-100 vial
$347
$277
U-100 cartridge
$430
$344
U-100 preﬁlled pen
$447
$357
 Glulisine
U-100 vial
$341
$273
U-100 preﬁlled pen
$439
$351
 Inhaled insulin
Inhalation cartridges
$1,503
NA
 Lispro
U-100 vial
$30†
$24†
U-100 cartridge
$408
$326
U-100 preﬁlled pen
$127†
$102†
U-200 preﬁlled pen
$424
$339
 Lispro-aabc
U-100 vial
$330
$261
U-100 preﬁlled pen
$424
$339
U-200 preﬁlled pen
$424
$338
 Lispro follow-on product
U-100 vial
$118
$94
U-100 preﬁlled pen
$151
$121
Short-acting
 Human regular
U-100 vial
$172 ($165, $178)‡
$137 ($132, $142)‡
U-100 preﬁlled pen
$208
$166
Intermediate-acting
 Human NPH
U-100 vial
$172 ($165, $178)‡
$137 ($132, $143)‡
U-100 preﬁlled pen
$208 ($208, $377)
$234 ($166, $303)
Concentrated human
regular insulin
 U-500 human regular insulin
U-500 vial
$178
$142
U-500 preﬁlled pen
$230
$184
Long-acting
 Detemir
U-100 vial; U-100 preﬁlled pen
$370
$295
 Degludec
U-100 vial
$142†
$327
U-100 preﬁlled pen
$142†
$114†
U-200 preﬁlled pen
$85†
$113†
 Glargine
U-100 vial; U-100 preﬁlled pen
$136†
$109†
U-300 preﬁlled pen
$363
$290
 Glargine biosimilar/
follow-on products
U-100 preﬁlled pen
$190 ($74, $323)
$95†
U-100 vial
$118†
$95†
Premixed insulin products
 Aspart 70/30
U-100 vial
$180†
$145†
U-100 preﬁlled pen
$224†
$179†
 Lispro 50/50
U-100 vial
$342
$274
U-100 preﬁlled pen
$424
$341
 Lispro 75/25
U-100 vial
$342
$274
U-100 preﬁlled pen
$127†
$102†
 NPH/regular 70/30
U-100 vial
$172 ($165, $178)‡
$138 ($132, $143)‡
U-100 preﬁlled pen
$208 ($208, $377)
$234 ($166, $302)
Premixed insulin/GLP-1
RA products
 Degludec/liraglutide
100/3.6 mg preﬁlled pen
$991
$795
 Glargine/lixisenatide
100/33 mg preﬁlled pen
$679
$543
AWP, average wholesale price; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; NA, data not available; NADAC, National Average Drug Ac-
quisition Cost. AWP (116) and NADAC (117) prices as of July 2023. *AWP or NADAC calculated as in Table 9.3. †Unbranded product prices
used when available. ‡AWP and NADAC data presented do not include vials of regular human insulin and NPH available at Walmart for ap-
proximately $25/vial; median listed alone when only one product and/or price.
diabetesjournals.org/care
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S173
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Combination Injectable Therapy
If basal insulin has been titrated to an ac-
ceptable fasting blood glucose level (or if
the dose is >0.5 units/kg/day with indi-
cations of need for other therapy) and
A1C remains above goal, consider ad-
vancing to combination injectable ther-
apy (Fig. 9.4). This approach can use a
GLP-1 RA or dual GIP and GLP-1 RA
added to basal insulin or multiple doses
of insulin (114,147). The combination of
basal insulin and GLP-1 RA (administered
via separate injections of individual prod-
ucts or single injection of a ﬁxed-ratio
product) has potent glucose-lowering ac-
tions and less weight gain and hypoglyce-
mia compared with intensiﬁed insulin plans
(148). Two different once-daily, ﬁxed dual
combination products containing basal in-
sulin plus a GLP-1 RA are available: insulin
glargine plus lixisenatide (iGlarLixi) and in-
sulin degludec plus liraglutide (IDegLira). In
select individuals with type 2 diabetes,
complex insulin plans can also be simpliﬁed
with ﬁxed-ratio GLP-1 RA-insulin product
(149).
Intensiﬁcation of insulin treatment can
be done by adding doses of prandial insu-
lin to basal insulin. Starting with a single
prandial dose with the largest meal of the
day is simple and effective, and it can be
advanced to a plan with multiple prandial
doses if necessary (150). Alternatively, for
an individual on basal insulin in whom ad-
ditional prandial coverage is desired but
administering insulin prior to one or more
meal(s) is not feasible, the medication
plan can be converted to two doses of a
premixed insulin. Each approach has ad-
vantages and disadvantages. For example,
basal-prandial plans offer greater ﬂexibility
for individuals who eat on irregular sched-
ules. On the other hand, two doses of
premixed insulin is a simple, convenient
means of spreading insulin across the day.
Moreover, human insulins, separately, self-
mixed, or as premixed NPH/regular (70/30)
formulations, are less costly alternatives
to insulin analogs. Figure 9.4 outlines these
options as well as recommendations for
further intensiﬁcation, if needed, to achieve
glycemic goals.When initiating intensiﬁca-
tion of insulin therapy, metformin, SGLT2
inhibitors, and GLP-1 RA (or dual GIP and
GLP-1 RA) should be maintained, while
sulfonylureas and DPP-4 inhibitors are
typically weaned or discontinued. In indi-
viduals with suboptimal blood glucose
management, especially those requiring
large insulin doses, adjunctive use of a
thiazolidinedione or an SGLT2 inhibitor
may help to improve control and reduce
the amount of insulin needed, although
potential side effects should be consid-
ered. Once a basal-bolus insulin plan is ini-
tiated, dose titration is important, with
adjustments made in both mealtime and
basal insulins based on the blood glucose
levels and an understanding of the phar-
macodynamic proﬁle of each formulation
(also known as pattern control or pattern
management). In some people with type 2
diabetes with signiﬁcant clinical complex-
ity, multimorbidity, and/or treatment bur-
den, it may become necessary to simplify
or deintensify complex insulin plans to de-
crease risk of hypoglycemia and improve
quality of life (see Section 13, “Older
Adults”).
References
1. Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
(DCCT)/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions
and Complications (EDIC) Study Research Group.
Mortality in type 1 diabetes in the DCCT/EDIC
versus the general population. Diabetes Care
2016;39:1378–1383
2. Lachin JM, Bebu I; DCCT/EDIC Research Group.
The beneﬁcial effects of earlier versus later
implementation of intensive therapy in type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2021;44:2225–2230
3. Lachin
JM;
DCCT/EDIC
Research
Group.
Understanding metabolic memory: the prolonged
inﬂuence of glycemia during the Diabetes Control
and Complications Trial (DCCT) on future risks of
complications during the study of the Epidemiology
of Diabetes Interventions and Complications (EDIC).
Diabetes Care 2021;44:2216–2224
4. Holt RIG, DeVries JH, Hess-Fischl A, et al. The
management of type 1 diabetes in adults. a
consensus report by the American Diabetes
Association (ADA) and the European Association
for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care
2021;44:2589–2625
5. Tricco AC, Ashoor HM, Antony J, et al. Safety,
effectiveness, and cost effectiveness of long
acting versus intermediate acting insulin for
patients with type 1 diabetes: systematic review
and network meta-analysis. BMJ 2014;349:g5459
6. Bartley PC, Bogoev M, Larsen J, Philotheou A.
Long-term efﬁcacy and safety of insulin detemir
compared to neutral protamine Hagedorn insulin
in patients with Type 1 diabetes using a treat-to-
target basal-bolus regimen with insulin aspart at
meals: a 2-year, randomized, controlled trial.
Diabet Med 2008;25:442–449
7. DeWitt DE, Hirsch IB. Outpatient insulin
therapy in type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus:
scientiﬁc review. JAMA 2003;289:2254–2264
8. Aronson R, Biester T, Leohr J, et al. Ultra rapid
lispro showed greater reduction in postprandial
glucose versus Humalog in children, adolescents
and adults with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Diabetes
Obes Metab 2023;25:1964–1972
9. Heise T, Pieber TR, Danne T, Erichsen L, Haahr
H. A pooled analysis of clinical pharmacology
trials investigating the pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic characteristics of fast-acting
insulin aspart in adults with type 1 diabetes. Clin
Pharmacokinet 2017;56:551–559
10. Bode BW, McGill JB, Lorber DL, Gross JL, Chang
PC; Afﬁnity 1 Study Group. Inhaled technosphere
insulin compared with injected prandial insulin in
type 1 diabetes: a randomized 24-week trial.
Diabetes Care 2015;38:2266–2273
11. Russell-Jones D, Bode BW, De Block C, et al.
Fast-acting insulin aspart improves glycemic control
in basal-bolus treatment for type 1 diabetes: results
of a 26-week multicenter, active-controlled, treat-
to-target, randomized, parallel-group trial (onset 1).
Diabetes Care 2017;40:943–950
12. Klaff L, Cao D, Dellva MA, et al. Ultra rapid
lispro improves postprandial glucose control
compared with lispro in patients with type 1
diabetes: results from the 26-week PRONTO-T1D
study. Diabetes Obes Metab 2020;22:1799–1807
13. Lane W, Bailey TS, Gerety G, et al.; Group
Information; SWITCH 1. Effect of insulin degludec
vs insulin glargine U100 on hypoglycemia in
patients with type 1 diabetes: the SWITCH 1
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2017;318:33–44
14. Home PD, Bergenstal RM, Bolli GB, et al.
New insulin glargine 300 units/mL versus glargine
100 units/mL in people with type 1 diabetes: a
randomized, phase 3a, open-label clinical trial
(EDITION 4). Diabetes Care 2015;38:2217–2225
15. Yeh HC, Brown TT, Maruthur N, et al.
Comparative effectiveness and safety of methods
of insulin delivery and glucose monitoring for
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Ann Intern Med 2012;157:336–347
16. Speight J, Choudhary P, Wilmot EG, et al.
Impact of glycaemic technologies on quality of
life and related outcomes in adults with type 1
diabetes: a narrative review. Diabet Med 2023;
40:e14944
17. Barnard K, Skinner T. Cross-sectional study
into quality of life issues surrounding insulin
pump use in type 1 diabetes. Pract Diabetes Int
2008;25:194–200
18. Mulinacci G, Alonso GT, Snell-Bergeon JK,
Shah VN. Glycemic outcomes with early initiation
of continuous glucose monitoring system in
recently diagnosed patients with type 1 diabetes.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:6–10
19. Elbalshy M, Haszard J, Smith H, et al. Effect
of divergent continuous glucose monitoring
technologies on glycaemic control in type 1
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomised controlled trials. Diabet
Med 2022;39:e14854
20. Champakanath A, Akturk HK, Alonso GT,
Snell-Bergeon JK, Shah VN. Continuous glucose
monitoring initiation within ﬁrst year of type 1
diabetes diagnosis is associated with improved
glycemic outcomes: 7-year follow-up study. Dia-
betes Care 2022;45:750–753
21. Weinstock RS, Xing D, Maahs DM, et al.; T1D
Exchange Clinic Network. Severe hypoglycemia
and diabetic ketoacidosis in adults with type 1
diabetes: results from the T1D Exchange clinic
registry. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2013;98:3411–
3419
22. Tamborlane WV, Beck RW, Bode BW, et al.;
Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation Continuous
Glucose Monitoring Study Group. Continuous
glucose monitoring and intensive treatment of
type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;359:1464–
1476
S174
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

23. Polonsky WH, Hessler D, Ruedy KJ; DIAMOND
Study Group. The impact of continuous glucose
monitoring on markers of quality of life in adults
with type 1 diabetes: further ﬁndings from the
DIAMOND randomized clinical trial. Diabetes Care
2017;40:736–741
24. Bergenstal RM, Klonoff DC, Garg SK, et al.;
ASPIRE In-Home Study Group. Threshold-based
insulin-pump interruption for reduction of hypo-
glycemia. N Engl J Med 2013;369:224–232
25. Forlenza GP, Li Z, Buckingham BA, et al.
Predictive low-glucose suspend reduces hypo-
glycemia in adults, adolescents, and children with
type 1 diabetes in an at-home randomized crossover
study: results of the PROLOG trial. Diabetes Care
2018;41:2155–2161
26. Phillip M, Nimri R, Bergenstal RM, et al.
Consensus recommendations for the use of
automated insulin delivery technologies in clinical
practice. Endocr Rev 2023;44:254–280
27. Peacock S, Frizelle I, Hussain S. A systematic
review of commercial hybrid closed-loop auto-
mated insulin delivery systems. Diabetes Ther 2023;
14:839–855
28. Choudhary P, Kolassa R, Keuthage W, et al.;
ADAPT study Group. Advanced hybrid closed
loop therapy versus conventional treatment
in adults with type 1 diabetes (ADAPT): a ran-
domised controlled study. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol 2022;10:720–731
29. Arunachalum S, Velado K, Vigersky RA,
Cordero TL. Glycemic outcomes during real-world
hybrid closed-loop system use by individuals with
type 1 diabetes in the United States. J Diabetes Sci
Technol 2023;17:951–958
30. Garg SK, Grunberger G, Weinstock R, et al.;
Adult and Pediatric MiniMed™HCL Outcomes
6-month RCT: HCL versus CSII Control Study
Group. Improved glycemia with hybrid closed-
loop versus continuous subcutaneous insulin
infusion therapy: results from a randomized
controlled trial. Diabetes Technol Ther 2023;25:
1–12
31. Russell SJ, Beck RW, Damiano ER, et al.;
Bionic Pancreas Research Group. Multicenter,
randomized trial of a bionic pancreas in type 1
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2022;387:1161–1172
32. Burnside MJ, Lewis DM, Crocket HR, et al.
Open-source automated insulin delivery in type 1
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2022;387:869–881
33. Burnside MJ, Lewis DM, Crocket HR, et al.
Extended use of an open-source automated
insulin delivery system in children and adults with
type 1 diabetes: the 24-week continuation phase
following the CREATE randomized controlled trial.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2023;25:250–259
34. Brown SA, Kovatchev BP, Raghinaru D, et al.;
iDCL Trial Research Group. Six-month randomized,
multicenter trial of closed-loop control in type 1
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;381:1707–1717
35. Collyns OJ, Meier RA, Betts ZL, et al. Improved
glycemic outcomes with Medtronic Minimed
advanced hybrid closed-loop delivery: results from
a randomized crossover trial comparing automated
insulin
delivery
with
predictive
low
glucose
suspend in people with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes
Care 2021;44:969–975
36. Brown SA, Beck RW, Raghinaru D, et al.; iDCL
Trial Research Group. Glycemic outcomes of use
of CLC versus PLGS in type 1 diabetes: a
randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care 2020;
43:1822–1828
37. Breton MD, Kovatchev BP. One year real-
world use of the Control-IQ advanced hybrid
closed-loop technology. Diabetes Technol Ther
2021;23:601–608
38. Lepore G, Rossini A, Bellante R, et al.
Switching
to
the
Minimed™
780G
system
achieves clinical targets for CGM in adults with
type 1 diabetes regardless of previous insulin
strategy and baseline glucose control. Acta
Diabetol 2022;59:1309–1315
39. Matejko B, Juza A, Kiec-Wilk B, et al.
Transitioning of people with type 1 diabetes from
multiple daily injections and self-monitoring of blood
glucose directly to MiniMed 780G advanced hybrid
closed-loop system: a two-center, randomized,
controlled study. Diabetes Care 2022;45:2628–2635
40. Isganaitis E, Raghinaru D, Ambler-Osborn L,
et al.; iDCL Trial Research Group. Closed-loop
insulin therapy improves glycemic control in
adolescents and young adults: outcomes from
the international diabetes closed-loop trial. Dia-
betes Technol Ther 2021;23:342–349
41. Forlenza GP, Carlson AL, Galindo RJ, et al.
Real-world evidence supporting Tandem Control-
IQ hybrid closed-loop success in the Medicare and
Medicaid type 1 and type 2 diabetes populations.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:814–823
42. Pease A, Zomer E, Liew D, et al. Cost-
effectiveness analysis of a hybrid closed-loop
system versus multiple daily injections and
capillary glucose testing for adults with type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2020;22:812–821
43. Lal RA, Maahs DM. Optimizing basal insulin
dosing. J Pediatr 2019;215:7–8
44. Mitsui Y, Kuroda A, Ishizu M, et al. Basal
insulin requirement in patients with type 1
diabetes depends on the age and body mass
index. J Diabetes Investig 2022;13:292–298
45. Castellano E, Attanasio R, Giagulli VA, et al.;
all on behalf of Associazione Medici Endocrinologi
(AME).The basal to total insulin ratio in outpatients
with diabetes on basal-bolus regimen. J Diabetes
Metab Disord 2018;17:393–399
46. Matejko B, Kukułka A, Kiec-Wilk B, Sta˛por A,
Klupa T, Malecki MT. Basal insulin dose in adults
with type 1 diabetes mellitus on insulin pumps in
real-life clinical practice: a single-center experience.
Adv Med 2018;2018:1473160
47. Cengiz E, Danne T, Ahmad T, et al. ISPAD
clinical practice consensus guidelines 2022: insulin
treatment in children and adolescents with
diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes 2022;23:1277–1296
48. King AB. Mean basal insulin dose is 0.2 U/kg/d
at near normal glycaemia for type 1 or 2 diabetes
on continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion or
once-nightly basal insulin. Diabetes Obes Metab
2021;23:866–869
49. Peters AL, Lafell L. The American Diabetes
Association/JDRF Type 1 Diabetes Sourcebook.
American Diabetes Association, 2013
50. Hirsch IB.Type 1 diabetes mellitus and the use
of ﬂexible insulin regimens. Am Fam Physician
1999;60:2343-2352, 2355-2346
51. Srinivasan S, Craig ME, Beeney L, et al. An
ambulatory stabilisation program for children
with newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes. Med J
Aust 2004;180:277–280
52. Lemieux L, Crawford S, Pacaud D. Starting
subcutaneous insulin doses in a paediatric
population with newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes.
Paediatr Child Health 2010;15:357–362
53. Chiang JL, Kirkman MS, Laffel LM; Type 1
Diabetes Sourcebook Authors. Type 1 diabetes
through the life span: a position statement of the
American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care
2014;37:2034–2054
54. S€amann A, M€uhlhauser I, Bender R, Hunger-
Dathe W, Kloos C, M€uller UA. Flexible intensive
insulin therapy in adults with type 1 diabetes and
high risk for severe hypoglycemia and diabetic
ketoacidosis. Diabetes Care 2006;29:2196–2199
55. Builes-Monta~no CE, Ortiz-Cano NA, Ramirez-
Rincon A, Rojas-Henao NA. Efﬁcacy and safety of
carbohydrate counting versus other forms of
dietary advice in patients with type 1 diabetes
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of randomised clinical trials. J Hum Nutr Diet
2022;35:1030–1042
56. Al Balwi R, Al Madani W, Al Ghamdi A.
Efﬁcacy of insulin dosing algorithms for high-fat
high-protein mixed meals to control postprandial
glycemic excursions in people living with type 1
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Pediatr Diabetes 2022;23:1635–1646
57. DAFNE Study Group. Training in ﬂexible,
intensive insulin management to enable dietary
freedom in people with type 1 diabetes: Dose
Adjustment For Normal Eating (DAFNE) ran-
domised controlled trial. BMJ 2002;325:746
58. Hopkins D, Lawrence I, Mansell P, et al.
Improved biomedical and psychological outcomes
1 year after structured education in ﬂexible insulin
therapy for people with type 1 diabetes: the U.K.
DAFNE experience. Diabetes Care 2012;35:1638–
1642
59. Speight J, Amiel SA, Bradley C, et al. Long-
term biomedical and psychosocial outcomes
following DAFNE (Dose Adjustment For Normal
Eating) structured education to promote intensive
insulin therapy in adults with sub-optimally
controlled Type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract
2010;89:22–29
60. Bruttomesso D, Boscari F, Lepore G, et al. A
“slide rule” to adjust insulin dose using trend
arrows in adults with type 1 diabetes: test in
silico and in real life. Diabetes Ther 2021;12:
1313–1324
61. Aleppo G, Laffel LM, Ahmann AJ, et al. A
practical approach to using trend arrows on the
Dexcom G5 CGM system for the management of
adults with diabetes. J Endocr Soc 2017;1:1445–
1460
62. Buckingham B, Xing D, Weinzimer S, et al.;
Diabetes Research In Children Network (DirecNet)
Study Group. Use of the DirecNet Applied
Treatment Algorithm (DATA) for diabetes man-
agement with a real-time continuous glucose
monitor (the FreeStyle Navigator). Pediatr Dia-
betes 2008;9:142–147
63. Parise M, Di Molfetta S, Graziano RT, et al. A
head-to-head comparison of two algorithms for
adjusting mealtime insulin doses based on CGM
trend arrows in adult patients with type 1
diabetes: results from an exploratory study. Int J
Environ Res Public Health 2023;20:3945
64. Petrovski G, Campbell J, Pasha M, et al.
Simpliﬁed meal announcement versus precise
carbohydrate counting in adolescents with type 1
diabetes using the MiniMed 780G advanced
hybrid closed loop system: a randomized con-
trolled trial comparing glucose control. Diabetes
Care 2023;46:544–550
diabetesjournals.org/care
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S175
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

65. Valentine V, Newswanger B, Prestrelski S,
Andre AD, Garibaldi M. Human factors usability
and validation studies of a glucagon autoinjector
in a simulated severe hypoglycemia rescue situation.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:522–530
66. Settles JA, Gerety GF, Spaepen E, Suico JG,
Child CJ. Nasal glucagon delivery is more successful
than injectable delivery: a simulated severe
hypoglycemia rescue. Endocr Pract 2020;26:407–
415
67. Herges JR, Galindo RJ, Neumiller JJ, Heien
HC, Umpierrez GE, McCoy RG. Glucagon prescribing
and costs among U.S. adults with diabetes, 2011-
2021. Diabetes Care 2023;46:620–627
68. Kahn PA, Liu S, McCoy R, Gabbay RA, Lipska
K. Glucagon use by U.S. adults with type 1 and
type 2 diabetes. J Diabetes Complications 2021;
35:107882
69. Frid AH, Kreugel G, Grassi G, et al. New insulin
delivery recommendations. Mayo Clin Proc 2016;
91:1231–1255
70. Bergenstal RM, Strock ES, Peremislov D,
Gibney MA, Parvu V, Hirsch LJ. Safety and efﬁcacy
of insulin therapy delivered via a 4mm pen
needle in obese patients with diabetes. Mayo
Clin Proc 2015;90:329–338
71. Qiao YC, Ling W, Pan YH, et al. Efﬁcacy and
safety of pramlintide injection adjunct to insulin
therapy in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. On-
cotarget 2017;8:66504–66515
72. Meng H, Zhang A, Liang Y, Hao J, Zhang X, Lu
J. Effect of metformin on glycaemic control in
patients with type 1 diabetes: a meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. Diabetes Metab Res
Rev 2018;34:e2983
73. Petrie JR, Chaturvedi N, Ford I, et al.;
REMOVAL Study Group. Cardiovascular and
metabolic effects of metformin in patients with
type 1 diabetes (REMOVAL): a double-blind,
randomised,
placebo-controlled
trial.
Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;5:597–609
74. Mathieu C, Zinman B, Hemmingsson JU,
et al.; ADJUNCT ONE Investigators. Efﬁcacy and
safety of liraglutide added to insulin treatment in
type 1 diabetes: the ADJUNCT ONE treat-to-
target randomized trial. Diabetes Care 2016;39:
1702–1710
75. Ahren B, Hirsch IB, Pieber TR, et al.;
ADJUNCT TWO Investigators. Efﬁcacy and safety
of liraglutide added to capped insulin treatment
in subjects with type 1 diabetes: the ADJUNCT
TWO randomized trial. Diabetes Care 2016;39:
1693–1701
76. Rao L, Ren C, Luo S, Huang C, Li X. Sodium-
glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors as an add-on
therapy to insulin for type 1 diabetes mellitus:
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Acta Diabetol 2021;58:869–880
77. Chen MB, Xu RJ, Zheng QH, Zheng XW,Wang
H. Efﬁcacy and safety of sotagliﬂozin adjuvant
therapy for type 1 diabetes mellitus: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore)
2020;99:e20875
78. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA
Introductory
Remarks:
January
17,
2019:
Endocrinologic and Metabolic Drugs Advisory
Committee Meeting. Accessed 10 August 2023.
Available from https://wayback.archive-it.org/
7993/20190207212714/https://www.fda.gov/
downloads/AdvisoryCommittees/Committees
MeetingMaterials/Drugs/Endocrinologicand
MetabolicDrugsAdvisoryCommittee/UCM629782
.pdf
79. Bhatt DL, Szarek M, Steg PG, et al.; SOLOIST-
WHF Trial Investigators. Sotagliﬂozin in patients
with diabetes and recent worsening heart failure.
N Engl J Med 2021;384:117–128
80. Bhatt DL, Szarek M, Pitt B, et al.; SCORED
Investigators. Sotagliﬂozin in patients with diabetes
and chronic kidney disease. N Engl J Med 2021;
384:129–139
81. Danne T, Garg S, Peters AL, et al. International
consensus on risk management of diabetic
ketoacidosis in patients with type 1 diabetes
treated with sodium-glucose cotransporter (SGLT)
inhibitors. Diabetes Care 2019;42:1147–1154
82. Lachin JM, McGee P; DCCT/EDIC Research
Group. Impact of C-peptide preservation on
metabolic and clinical outcomes in the Diabetes
Control and Complications Trial. Diabetes 2014;
63:739–748
83. Dean PG, Kukla A, Stegall MD, Kudva YC.
Pancreas transplantation. BMJ 2017;357:j1321
84. Davies MJ, Aroda VR, Collins BS, et al.
Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes,
2022: a consensus report by the American
Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European
Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD).
Diabetes Care 2022;45:2753–2786
85. Lingvay I, Sumithran P, Cohen RV, le Roux CW.
Obesity management as a primary treatment
goal for type 2 diabetes: time to reframe the
conversation. Lancet 2022;399:394–405
86. Wing RR, Lang W, Wadden TA, et al.; Look
AHEAD Research Group. Beneﬁts of modest
weight loss in improving cardiovascular risk
factors in overweight and obese individuals with
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2011;34:1481–
1486
87. Frıas JP, Davies MJ, Rosenstock J, et al.;
SURPASS-2
Investigators.
Tirzepatide
versus
semaglutide once weekly in patients with type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2021;385:503–515
88. Sorli C, Harashima SI, Tsoukas GM, et al.
Efﬁcacy and safety of once-weekly semaglutide
monotherapy versus placebo in patients with
type 2 diabetes (SUSTAIN 1): a double-blind,
randomised, placebo-controlled, parallel-group,
multinational, multicentre phase 3a trial. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;5:251–260
89. Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, Matthews
DR, Neil HA. 10-year follow-up of intensive
glucose control in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med
2008;359:1577–1589
90. Maruthur NM, Tseng E, Hutﬂess S, et al.
diabetes
medications
as
monotherapy
or
metformin-based combination therapy for type 2
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Ann Intern Med 2016;164:740–751
91. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA drug
safety communication: FDA revises warnings
regarding use of the diabetes medicine metformin
in certain patients with reduced kidney function.
2017. Accessed 15 October 2023. Available from
https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-
availability/fda-drug-safety-communication-fda-
revises-warnings-regarding-use-diabetes-medicine-
metformin-certain
92. Out M, Kooy A, Lehert P, Schalkwijk CA,
Stehouwer
CDA.
Long-term
treatment
with
metformin in type 2 diabetes and methylmalonic
acid: Post hoc analysis of a randomized controlled
4.3year trial. J Diabetes Complications 2018;32:
171–178
93. Aroda VR, Edelstein SL, Goldberg RB, et al.;
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.
Long-term metformin use and vitamin B12
deﬁciency in the Diabetes Prevention Program
Outcomes Study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;
101:1754–1761
94. Henry RR, Murray AV, Marmolejo MH,
Hennicken D, Ptaszynska A, List JF. Dapagliﬂozin,
metformin XR, or both: initial pharmacotherapy
for type 2 diabetes, a randomised controlled trial.
Int J Clin Pract 2012;66:446–456
95. Babu A, Mehta A, Guerrero P, et al. Safe and
simple emergency department discharge therapy
for patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and
severe hyperglycemia. Endocr Pract 2009;15:
696–704
96. Cahn A, Cefalu WT. Clinical considerations
for use of initial combination therapy in type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2016;39(Suppl. 2):S137–
S145
97. Abdul-Ghani MA, Puckett C, Triplitt C, et al.
Initial combination therapy with metformin,
pioglitazone and exenatide is more effective than
sequential add-on therapy in subjects with new-
onset diabetes. Results from the Efﬁcacy and
Durability of Initial Combination Therapy for
Type 2 Diabetes (EDICT): a randomized trial.
Diabetes Obes Metab 2015;17:268–275
98. Phung OJ, Sobieraj DM, Engel SS, Rajpathak
SN. Early combination therapy for the treatment
of type 2 diabetes mellitus: systematic review and
meta-analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab 2014;16:
410–417
99. Aroda VR, Gonzalez-Galvez G, Grøn R, et al.
Durability of insulin degludec plus liraglutide
versus insulin glargine U100 as initial injectable
therapy in type 2 diabetes (DUAL VIII): a multicentre,
open-label, phase 3b, randomised controlled trial.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2019;7:596–605
100. Matthews DR, Paldanius PM, Proot P, Chiang
Y, Stumvoll M; VERIFY study group. Glycaemic
durability of an early combination therapy with
vildagliptin and metformin versus sequential met-
formin monotherapy in newly diagnosed type 2
diabetes (VERIFY): a 5-year, multicentre, rando-
mised, double-blind trial. Lancet 2019;394:1519–
1529
101. Bennett WL, Maruthur NM, Singh S, et al.
Comparative effectiveness and safety of medi-
cations for type 2 diabetes: an update including
new drugs and 2-drug combinations. Ann Intern
Med 2011;154:602–613
102. Maloney A, Rosenstock J, Fonseca V. A
model-based meta-analysis of 24 antihyperglycemic
drugs for type 2 diabetes: comparison of treatment
effects at therapeutic doses. Clin Pharmacol Ther
2019;105:1213–1223
103. Vijan S, Sussman JB, Yudkin JS, Hayward RA.
Effect of patients’ risks and preferences on health
gains with plasma glucose level lowering in type 2
diabetes mellitus. JAMA Intern Med 2014;174:
1227–1234
104. Tsapas A, Avgerinos I, Karagiannis T, et al.
Comparative effectiveness of glucose-lowering
drugs for type 2 diabetes: a systematic review
and network meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med
2020;173:278–286
105. Pratley R, Amod A, Hoff ST, et al.; PIONEER
4 investigators. Oral semaglutide versus sub-
cutaneous liraglutide and placebo in type 2
S176
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

diabetes (PIONEER 4): a randomised, double-
blind, phase 3a trial. Lancet 2019;394:39–50
106. Del Prato S, Kahn SE, Pavo I, et al.;
SURPASS-4 Investigators. Tirzepatide versus insulin
glargine in type 2 diabetes and increased cardio-
vascular risk (SURPASS-4): a randomised, open-
label, parallel-group, multicentre, phase 3 trial.
Lancet 2021;398:1811–1824
107. Singh S,Wright EE Jr, Kwan AY, et al. Glucagon-
like peptide-1 receptor agonists compared with
basal insulins for the treatment of type 2 diabetes
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Diabetes Obes Metab 2017;19:228–238
108. Levin PA, Nguyen H, Wittbrodt ET, Kim SC.
Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists: a
systematic review of comparative effectiveness
research. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes 2017;10:
123–139
109. Abd El Aziz MS, Kahle M, Meier JJ, Nauck
MA. A meta-analysis comparing clinical effects of
short- or long-acting GLP-1 receptor agonists
versus insulin treatment from head-to-head
studies in type 2 diabetic patients. Diabetes Obes
Metab 2017;19:216–227
110. Giorgino
F,
Benroubi
M,
Sun
JH,
Zimmermann AG, Pechtner V. Efﬁcacy and safety
of once-weekly dulaglutide versus insulin glargine
in patients with type 2 diabetes on metformin
and glimepiride (AWARD-2). Diabetes Care 2015;
38:2241–2249
111. Aroda VR, Bain SC, Cariou B, et al. Efﬁcacy
and safety of once-weekly semaglutide versus
once-daily
insulin
glargine
as
add-on
to
metformin (with or without sulfonylureas) in
insulin-naive patients with type 2 diabetes
(SUSTAIN 4): a randomised, open-label, parallel-
group, multicentre, multinational, phase 3a trial.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;5:355–366
112. Davies M, Heller S, Sreenan S, et al. Once-
weekly exenatide versus once- or twice-daily
insulin detemir: randomized, open-label, clinical
trial of efﬁcacy and safety in patients with type 2
diabetes treated with metformin alone or in
combination with sulfonylureas. Diabetes Care
2013;36:1368–1376
113. Diamant M, Van Gaal L, Stranks S, et al.
Once weekly exenatide compared with insulin
glargine titrated to target in patients with type 2
diabetes (DURATION-3): an open-label rando-
mised trial. Lancet 2010;375:2234–2243
114. Dahl D, Onishi Y, Norwood P, et al. Effect of
subcutaneous tirzepatide vs placebo added to
titrated insulin glargine on glycemic control in
patients with type 2 diabetes: the SURPASS-5
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2022;327:534–545
115. Riddle MC, Herman WH. The cost of
diabetes care-an elephant in the room. Diabetes
Care 2018;41:929–932
116. Micromedex
RED
BOOK
(electronic
version). Merative, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Accessed
24
July
2023.
Available
from
https://www
.micromedexsolutions.com
117. Data.Medicaid.gov. NADAC (National Average
Drug Acquisition Cost) 2023. Accessed 24 July 2023.
Available from https://data.medicaid.gov/dataset/
4a00010a-132b-4e4d-a611-543c9521280f
118. Kang H, Lobo JM, Kim S, Sohn MW. Cost-
related medication non-adherence among U.S.
adults with diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract
2018;143:24–33
119. Patel MR, Piette JD, Resnicow K, Kowalski-
Dobson T, Heisler M. Social determinants of
health, cost-related nonadherence, and cost-
reducing behaviors among adults with diabetes:
ﬁndings from the National Health Interview
Survey. Med Care 2016;54:796–803
120. Herges JR, Neumiller JJ, McCoy RG. Easing
the ﬁnancial burden of diabetes management: a
guide for patients and primary care clinicians.
Clin Diabetes 2021;39:427–436
121. Gerstein HC, Sattar N, Rosenstock J, et al.;
AMPLITUDE-O Trial Investigators. Cardiovascular
and renal outcomes with efpeglenatide in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2021;385:896–907
122. Nathan DM, Lachin JM, Bebu I, et al.;
GRADE
Study
Research
Group.
Glycemia
reduction in type 2 diabetes - microvascular and
cardiovascular outcomes. N Engl J Med 2022;
387:1075–1088
123. Blonde L, Merilainen M, Karwe V; TITRATE
Study Group. Patient-directed titration for achieving
glycaemic goals using a once-daily basal insulin
analogue: an assessment of two different fasting
plasma glucose targets - the TITRATE study.
Diabetes Obes Metab 2009;11:623–631
124. Porcellati
F,
Lucidi
P,
Cioli
P,
et
al.
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of insulin
glargine given in the evening as compared with in
the morning in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care
2015;38:503–512
125. Wang Z, Hedrington MS, Gogitidze Joy N,
et al. Dose-response effects of insulin glargine in
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2010;33:1555–
1560
126. Semlitsch T, Engler J, Siebenhofer A, Jeitler
K, Berghold A, Horvath K. (Ultra-)long-acting
insulin analogues versus NPH insulin (human
isophane insulin) for adults with type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020;11:
CD005613
127. Mannucci E, Caiulo C, Naletto L, Madama
G, Monami M. Efﬁcacy and safety of different
basal and prandial insulin analogues for the
treatment of type 2 diabetes: a network meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Endocrine
2021;74:508–517
128. Russell-Jones D, Gall MA, Niemeyer M,
Diamant M, Del Prato S. Insulin degludec results
in lower rates of nocturnal hypoglycaemia and
fasting plasma glucose vs. insulin glargine: A
meta-analysis of seven clinical trials. Nutr Metab
Cardiovasc Dis 2015;25:898–905
129. Cowart K. Overbasalization: addressing
hesitancy in treatment intensiﬁcation beyond
basal insulin. Clin Diabetes 2020;38:304–310
130. Cefalu WT, Dawes DE, Gavlak G, et al.;
Insulin Access and Affordability Working Group.
Insulin Access and Affordability Working Group:
conclusions and recommendations. Diabetes Care
2018;41:1299–1311
131. Medicare.gov. Insulin. Accessed 19 August
2023. Available from https://www.medicare.gov/
coverage/insulin
132. Lipska KJ, Parker MM, Moffet HH, Huang
ES, Karter AJ. Association of initiation of basal
insulin analogs vs neutral protamine Hagedorn
insulin with hypoglycemia-related emergency
department visits or hospital admissions and
with glycemic control in patients with type 2
diabetes. JAMA 2018;320:53–62
133. McCall AL. Insulin therapy and hypoglycemia.
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 2012;41:57–87
134. Mannucci E, Monami M, Marchionni N.
Short-acting insulin analogues vs. regular human
insulin in type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis.
Diabetes Obes Metab 2009;11:53–59
135. Heller S, Bode B, Kozlovski P, Svendsen AL.
Meta-analysis of insulin aspart versus regular
human insulin used in a basal-bolus regimen for
the treatment of diabetes mellitus. J Diabetes
2013;5:482–491
136. de la Pe~na A, Riddle M, Morrow LA, et al.
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of high-
dose human regular U-500 insulin versus human
regular U-100 insulin in healthy obese subjects.
Diabetes Care 2011;34:2496–2501
137. Wysham C, Hood RC, Warren ML, Wang T,
Morwick TM, Jackson JA. Effect of total daily
dose on efﬁcacy, dosing, and safety of 2 dose
titration regimens of human regular U500 insulin
in severely insulin-resistant patients with type 2
diabetes. Endocr Pract 2016;22:653–665
138. Becker RH,
Dahmen R,
Bergmann K,
Lehmann A, Jax T, Heise T. New insulin glargine
300 Units · mL-1 provides a more even activity
proﬁle and prolonged glycemic control at steady
state compared with insulin glargine 100 Units ·
mL-1. Diabetes Care 2015;38:637–643
139. Riddle MC, Yki-J€arvinen H, Bolli GB, et al.
One-year sustained glycaemic control and less
hypoglycaemia with new insulin glargine 300 U/ml
compared with 100 U/ml in people with type 2
diabetes using basal plus meal-time insulin: the
EDITION 1 12-month randomized trial, including 6-
month extension. Diabetes Obes Metab 2015;
17:835–842
140. Yki-J€arvinen H, Bergenstal R, Ziemen M,
et al.; EDITION 2 Study Investigators. New insulin
glargine 300 units/mL versus glargine 100 units/mL
in people with type 2 diabetes using oral agents
and basal insulin: glucose control and hypo-
glycemia in a 6-month randomized controlled trial
(EDITION 2). Diabetes Care 2014;37:3235–3243
141. Korsatko S, Deller S, Koehler G, et al. A
comparison of the steady-state pharmacokinetic
and pharmacodynamic proﬁles of 100 and
200 U/mL formulations of ultra-long-acting insulin
degludec. Clin Drug Investig 2013;33:515–521
142. de la Pe~na A, Seger M, Soon D, et al.
Bioequivalence
and
comparative
pharmaco-
dynamics of insulin lispro 200 U/mL relative to
insulin lispro (HumalogV
R ) 100U/mL. Clin Pharma-
col Drug Dev 2016;5:69–75
143. Gentile S, Fusco A, Colarusso S, et al. A
randomized, open-label, comparative, crossover
trial on preference, efﬁcacy, and safety proﬁles of
lispro insulin u-100 versus concentrated lispro
insulin u-200 in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus: a possible contribution to greater treatment
adherence. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2018;17:445–450
144. Akturk HK, Snell-Bergeon JK, Rewers A,
et al. Improved postprandial glucose with inhaled
technosphere insulin compared with insulin
aspart in patients with type 1 diabetes on
multiple daily injections: the STATstudy. Diabetes
Technol Ther 2018;20:639–647
145. Hoogwerf BJ, Pantalone KM, Basina M,
Jones MC, Grant M, Kendall DM. Results of a
24-week trial of technosphere insulin versus
insulin aspart in type 2 diabetes. Endocr Pract
2021;27:38–43
146. Grant M, Heise T, Baughman R. Com-
parison of pharmacokinetics and pharmaco-
dynamics of inhaled technosphere insulin and
subcutaneous insulin lispro in the treatment of
diabetesjournals.org/care
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S177
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

type 1 diabetes mellitus. Clin Pharmacokinet
2022;61:413–422
147. Maiorino MI, Chiodini P, Bellastella G,
Capuano A, Esposito K, Giugliano D. Insulin and
glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist com-
bination therapy in type 2 diabetes: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized con-
trolled trials. Diabetes Care 2017;40:614–624
148. Castellana M, Cignarelli A, Brescia F, Laviola L,
Giorgino F. GLP-1 receptor agonist added to
insulin versus basal-plus or basal-bolus insulin
therapy in type 2 diabetes: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Diabetes Metab Res Rev
2019;35:e3082
149. Taybani Z, Botyik B, Katko M, Gyimesi A,
Varkonyi T. Simplifying complex insulin regimens
while preserving good glycemic control in type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Ther 2019;10:1869–1878
150. Rodbard HW, Visco VE, Andersen H, Hiort
LC,
Shu
DH. Treatment
intensiﬁcation
with
stepwise addition of prandial insulin aspart boluses
compared with full basal-bolus therapy (FullSTEP
Study): a randomised, treat-to-target clinical trial.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2014;2:30–37
151. Davies MJ, D’Alessio DA, Fradkin J, et al.
Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes,
2018: a consensus report by the American
Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European
Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD).
Diabetes Care 2018;41:2669–2701
152. Tsapas A, Karagiannis T, Kakotrichi P, et al.
Comparative efﬁcacy of glucose-lowering medi-
cations on body weight and blood pressure in
patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic
review and network meta-analysis. Diabetes Obes
Metab 2021;23:2116–2124
S178
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

10. Cardiovascular Disease and
Risk Management: Standards of
Care in Diabetes—2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S179–S218 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S010
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes
the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the
components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to
evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee, an in-
terprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of Care
annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA stand-
ards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s clini-
cal practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee
members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to com-
ment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
For prevention and management of diabetes complications in children and adoles-
cents, please refer to Section 14, “Children and Adolescents.”
Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD)—deﬁned as coronary heart disease
(CHD), cerebrovascular disease, or peripheral artery disease (PAD) presumed to be of
atherosclerotic origin—is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality for individuals
with diabetes and results in an estimated $39.4 billion in cardiovascular-related spend-
ing per year associated with diabetes (1). Common conditions coexisting with type 2
diabetes (e.g., hypertension and dyslipidemia) are clear risk factors for ASCVD, and dia-
betes itself confers independent risk. Numerous studies have shown the efﬁcacy of
controlling individual cardiovascular risk factors in preventing or slowing ASCVD in peo-
ple with diabetes. Furthermore, large beneﬁts are seen when multiple cardiovascular
risk factors (glycemic, blood pressure, and lipid control) are addressed simultaneously,
with evidence for legacy beneﬁts (2–4). Under the current paradigm of aggressive risk
factor modiﬁcation in people with diabetes, there is evidence that measures of
10-year CHD risk among U.S. adults with diabetes have improved signiﬁcantly over
the past decade (5) and that ASCVD morbidity and mortality have decreased (3,6).
Heart failure is another major cause of morbidity and mortality from cardiovascular
disease. The American Diabetes Association (ADA) has developed a consensus report
to summarize guidance for the screening, diagnosis, and treatment of people with di-
abetes (7). Recent studies have found that rates of incident heart failure hospitaliza-
tion (adjusted for age and sex) were twofold higher in people with diabetes
compared with those without (8,9). People with diabetes may present with a wide
spectrum of heart failure, including heart failure with preserved ejection fraction
(HFpEF), heart failure with mildly reduced ejection fraction (HFmEF), or heart failure
with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). Hypertension is often a precursor of heart fail-
ure of either type, and ASCVD can coexist with either type of heart failure (10),
whereas prior myocardial infarction (MI) is often a major factor in HFrEF. Recent trials
including people with type 2 diabetes, most of whom also had ASCVD, have shown
*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
This section has received endorsement from the
American College of Cardiology.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Asso-
ciation Professional Practice Committee. 10.
Cardiovascular disease and risk management:
Standards of Care in Diabetes—2024. Diabetes
Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S179–S218
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
10. CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE AND RISK MANAGEMENT
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
S179
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

that rates of heart failure hospitalization
signiﬁcantly decreased with use of
sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2)
inhibitors (11–14).
A recent meta-analysis indicated that
SGLT2 inhibitors reduce the risk of heart
failure hospitalization, cardiovascular mor-
tality, and all-cause mortality in people
with (secondary prevention) and without
(primary prevention) cardiovascular dis-
ease (15).
For prevention and management of
both ASCVD and heart failure, cardio-
vascular risk factors should be systemati-
cally assessed at least annually in all
people with diabetes. These risk factors
include duration of diabetes, obesity/
overweight, hypertension, dyslipidemia,
smoking, a family history of premature
coronary disease, chronic kidney disease
(CKD), and the presence of albuminuria.
Modiﬁable abnormal risk factors should
be treated as described in these guide-
lines. Notably, the majority of evidence
supporting interventions to reduce car-
diovascular risk in diabetes comes from
trials of people with type 2 diabetes. No
randomized trials have been speciﬁcally
designed to assess the impact of cardio-
vascular risk reduction strategies in peo-
ple with type 1 diabetes. Therefore, the
recommendations for cardiovascular risk
factor modiﬁcation for people with type 1
diabetes are extrapolated from data ob-
tained in people with type 2 diabetes
and are similar to those for people with
type 2 diabetes.
As depicted in Fig. 10.1, a comprehen-
sive approach to the reduction in risk of
diabetes-related complications is recom-
mended. Therapy that includes multiple,
concurrent evidence-based approaches
to care will provide complementary re-
duction in the risks of microvascular
outcomes, including kidney, retinopathy,
neurologic, and cardiovascular complica-
tions. Management of glycemia, blood
pressure, and lipids and the incorpora-
tion of speciﬁc therapies with cardiovas-
cular and kidney outcomes beneﬁt (as
individually appropriate) are considered
fundamental elements of global risk re-
duction in diabetes.
THE RISK CALCULATOR
The American College of Cardiology
ASCVD risk calculator (Risk Estimator Plus)
is generally a useful tool to estimate
10-year risk of a ﬁrst ASCVD event
(available online at tools.acc.org/ASCVD-
Risk-Estimator-Plus). The calculator was
developed to stratify cardiovascular risk
and identify those people who will beneﬁt
most from statin therapy and from treat-
ment with antihypertensive medications
(16). The calculator includes diabetes as a
risk factor, since diabetes itself confers in-
creased risk for ASCVD, although it should
be acknowledged that these risk calcula-
tors do not account for the duration of
diabetes or the presence of diabetes com-
plications, such as albuminuria. In addition,
the majority of people with diabetes should
be treated with statin therapy, and hyper-
tension should be promptly treated. As
we will discuss below, comprehensive
management of hypertension, hyperlip-
idemia, and hyperglycemia using man-
agement approaches with established
beneﬁt are important strategies to re-
duce cardiovascular risk.
HYPERTENSION/BLOOD PRESSURE
CONTROL
An elevated blood pressure is deﬁned as
a systolic blood pressure 120–129 mmHg
and a diastolic blood pressure <80 mmHg
(17). Hypertension is deﬁned as a systolic
blood pressure $130 mmHg or a diastolic
blood pressure $80 mmHg (17). This is in
agreement with the deﬁnition of hyper-
tension by the American College of Cardi-
ology and American Heart Association
(17). Hypertension is common among
people with either type 1 or type 2 diabe-
tes. Hypertension is a major risk factor for
ASCVD, heart failure, and microvascular
complications. Moreover, numerous studies
have shown that antihypertensive therapy
reduces ASCVD events, heart failure,
and microvascular complications. Please
refer to the ADA position statement
“Diabetes and Hypertension” for a de-
tailed review of the epidemiology, diag-
nosis, and treatment of hypertension
(18) and recent updated hypertension
guideline recommendations (17,19,20).
Screening and Diagnosis
Recommendations
10.1 Blood pressure should be mea-
sured at every routine clinical visit.
When possible, individuals found to
have elevated blood pressure (systolic
blood pressure 120–129 mmHg and
diastolic <80 mmHg) should have blood
pressure conﬁrmed using multiple read-
ings, including measurements on a sepa-
rate day, to diagnose hypertension. A
Hypertension is deﬁned as a systolic
blood pressure $130 mmHg or a dia-
stolic blood pressure $80 mmHg based
Figure 10.1—Multifactorial approach to reduction in risk of diabetes complications. *Risk re-
duction interventions to be applied as individually appropriate.
S180
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

on an average of two or more meas-
urements obtained on two or more
occasions. A Individuals with blood
pressure $180/110 mmHg and car-
diovascular disease could be diag-
nosed with hypertension at a single
visit. E
10.2 All people with hypertension
and diabetes should be counseled to
monitor their blood pressure at home
after appropriate education. A
Blood pressure should be measured at ev-
ery routine clinical visit by a trained indi-
vidual and should follow the guidelines
established for the general population:
measurement in the seated position, with
feet on the ﬂoor and arm supported at
heart level, after 5 min of rest. Cuff
size should be appropriate for the up-
per-arm circumference (21). Elevated
values should preferably be conﬁrmed
on a separate day; however, in indivi-
duals with cardiovascular disease and
blood pressure $180/110 mmHg, it is
reasonable to diagnose hypertension at
a single visit (19). Postural changes in
blood pressure and pulse may be evi-
dence of autonomic neuropathy and
therefore require adjustment of blood
pressure targets. Orthostatic blood pres-
sure measurements should be checked
on initial visit and as indicated.
Home blood pressure self-monitoring
and 24-h ambulatory blood pressure mon-
itoring may provide evidence of white
coat hypertension, masked hypertension,
or other discrepancies between ofﬁce and
“true” blood pressure (22,23). In addition
to conﬁrming or refuting a diagnosis of
hypertension, home blood pressure assess-
ment may be useful to monitor antihyper-
tensive treatment. Studies of individuals
without diabetes found that home meas-
urements may better correlate with ASCVD
risk than ofﬁce measurements (22,23).
Moreover, home blood pressure monitor-
ing may improve medication-taking behav-
ior and thus help reduce cardiovascular
risk (24).
Treatment Goals
Recommendations
10.3Forpeoplewithdiabetesandhyper-
tension, blood pressure targets should
be individualized through a shared deci-
sion-making process that addresses car-
diovascular risk, potential adverse effects
of antihypertensive medications, and in-
dividual preferences. B
10.4 The on-treatment target blood
pressure goal is <130/80 mmHg, if
it can be safely attained. A
10.5 In pregnant individuals with dia-
betes and chronic hypertension, a blood
pressure threshold of 140/90 mmHg for
initiation or titration of therapy is associ-
ated with better pregnancy outcomes
than reserving treatment for severe hy-
pertension, with no increase in risk of
small-for-gestational-age birth weight. A
There are limited data on the opti-
mal lower limit, but therapy should
be deintensiﬁed for blood pressure
<90/60 mmHg. E A blood pressure tar-
get of 110–135/85 mmHg is suggested
in the interest of reducing the risk for
accelerated maternal hypertension. A
Randomized clinical trials have demon-
strated unequivocally that treatment of
hypertension reduces cardiovascular events
as well as microvascular complications
(25–31). There has been controversy on
the recommendation of a speciﬁc blood
pressure goal in people with diabetes. The
committee recognizes that there has been
no randomized controlled trial to speciﬁ-
cally demonstrate a decreased incidence
of cardiovascular events in people with
diabetes by targeting a blood pressure
<130/80 mmHg. The recommendation
to support a blood pressure goal of
<130/80 mmHg in people with diabetes is
consistent with guidelines from the Ameri-
can College of Cardiology and American
Heart Association (18), the International
Society of Hypertension (19), and the Euro-
pean Society of Cardiology (20). The com-
mittee’s recommendation for the blood
pressure target of <130/80 mmHg derives
primarily from the collective evidence of
the following randomized controlled trials.
The Systolic Blood Pressure Interven-
tion Trial (SPRINT) demonstrated that
treatment to a target systolic blood
pressure of <120 mmHg decreases car-
diovascular event rates by 25% in high-
risk individuals, although people with
diabetes were excluded from this trial
(32). The recently completed Strategy
of Blood Pressure Intervention in the
Elderly Hypertensive Patients (STEP) trial
included nearly 20% of people with dia-
betes and noted decreased cardiovascu-
lar events with treatment of hypertension
to a blood pressure target of <130 mmHg
(33). While the ACCORD (Action to Control
Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes) blood pres-
sure trial (ACCORD BP) did not conﬁrm
that targeting a systolic blood pressure of
<120 mmHg in people with diabetes re-
sults in decreased cardiovascular event
rates, the prespeciﬁed secondary outcome
of stroke was reduced by 41% with inten-
sive treatment (34). The Action in Diabetes
and Vascular Disease: Preterax and Diami-
cron MR Controlled Evaluation (ADVANCE)
trial revealed that treatment with perindo-
pril/indapamide to an achieved systolic
blood pressure of 135 mmHg signiﬁ-
cantly decreased cardiovascular event rates
compared with a placebo treatment with
an achieved blood pressure of 140 mmHg
(35). Therefore, it is recommended that
people with diabetes who have hyperten-
sion should be treated to blood pres-
sure targets of <130/80 mmHg. Notably,
there is an absence of high-quality data
available to guide blood pressure targets in
people with type 1 diabetes, but a similar
blood pressure target of <130/80 mmHg
is recommended in people with type 1
diabetes. As discussed below, treatment
should be individualized, and treatment
should not be targeted to <120/80
mmHg, as a mean achieved blood pressure
of <120/80 mmHg is associated with ad-
verse events.
Randomized Controlled Trials of Intensive
Versus Standard Blood Pressure Control
SPRINT provides the strongest evidence to
support lower blood pressure goals in indi-
viduals at increased cardiovascular risk, al-
though this trial excluded people with
diabetes (32). The trial enrolled 9,361 indi-
viduals with a systolic blood pressure of
$130 mmHg and increased cardiovascular
risk and treated to a systolic blood pressure
target of <120 mmHg (intensive treat-
ment) versus a target of <140 mmHg
(standard treatment).The primary compos-
ite outcome of MI, coronary syndromes,
stroke, heart failure, or death from cardio-
vascular causes was reduced by 25% in the
intensive treatment group. The achieved
systolic blood pressures in the trial were
121 mmHg and 136 mmHg in the intensive
versus standard treatment group, respec-
tively. Adverse outcomes, including hypo-
tension, syncope, electrolyte abnormality,
and acute kidney injury (AKI), were more
common in the intensive treatment arm;
risk of adverse outcomes needs to be
weighed against the cardiovascular beneﬁt
of more intensive blood pressure lowering.
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S181
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

ACCORD BP provides the strongest di-
rect assessment of the beneﬁts and risks
of intensive blood pressure control in peo-
ple with type 2 diabetes (34). In the study,
a total of 4,733 individuals with type 2
diabetes were assigned to intensive ther-
apy (targeting a systolic blood pressure
<120 mmHg) or standard therapy (target-
ing a systolic blood pressure <140 mmHg).
The mean achieved systolic blood pressures
were 119 mmHg and 133 mmHg in the
intensive versus standard group, respec-
tively. The primary composite outcome of
nonfatal MI, nonfatal stroke, or death
from cardiovascular causes was not signiﬁ-
cantly reduced in the intensive treatment
group. The prespeciﬁed secondary out-
come of stroke was signiﬁcantly reduced
by 41% in the intensive treatment group.
Adverse events attributed to blood pres-
sure treatment, including hypotension,
syncope, bradycardia, hyperkalemia, and
elevations in serum creatinine, occurred
more frequently in the intensive treatment
arm than in the standard therapy arm
(Table 10.1).
Of note, the ACCORD BP and SPRINT tri-
alstargeted asimilarsystolic blood pressure
<120 mmHg, but in contrast to SPRINT,
the primary composite cardiovascular end
point was nonsigniﬁcantly reduced in
ACCORD BP. The results have been inter-
preted to be generally consistent between
both trials, but ACCORD BP was viewed as
underpowered due to the composite pri-
mary end point being less sensitive to
blood pressure regulation (32).
The more recent STEP trial assigned
8,511 individuals aged 60–80 years with
hypertension to a systolic blood pres-
sure target of 110 to <130 mmHg (in-
tensive treatment) or a target of 130 to
<150 mmHg (33). In this trial, the primary
composite outcome of stroke, acute cor-
onary syndrome, acute decompensated
heart failure, coronary revascularization,
atrial ﬁbrillation, or death from cardio-
vascular causes occurred in 3.5% of indi-
viduals in the intensive treatment group
versus 4.6% in the standard treatment
group (hazard ratio [HR] 0.74 [95% CI
0.60–0.92]; P = 0.007). In this trial,
18.9% of individuals in the intensive
treatment arm and 19.4% in the stan-
dard treatment arm had a diagnosis of
type 2 diabetes. Hypotension occurred
more frequently in the intensive treat-
ment group (3.4%) compared with the
standard treatment group (2.6%), with-
out signiﬁcant differences in other adverse
events, including dizziness, syncope, or
fractures.
In ADVANCE, 11,140 people with type 2
diabetes were randomized to receive ei-
ther treatment with a ﬁxed combination
of perindopril/indapamide or matching
placebo (35). The primary end point, a
composite of cardiovascular death, nonfa-
tal stroke infarction, or worsening renal or
diabetic eye disease, was reduced by
9% in the combination treatment. The
achieved systolic blood pressure was
135 mmHg in the treatment group and
140 mmHg in the placebo group.
The Hypertension Optimal Treatment
(HOT) trial enrolled 18,790 individuals
and targeted diastolic blood pressure
<90 mmHg, <85 mmHg, or <80 mmHg
(36). The cardiovascular event rates, de-
ﬁned as fatal or nonfatal MI, fatal and
nonfatal strokes, and all other cardio-
vascular events, were not signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent between diastolic blood pressure
targets (#90 mmHg, #85 mmHg, and
#80 mmHg), although the lowest inci-
dence of cardiovascular events occurred
with an achieved diastolic blood pressure
of 82 mmHg. However, in people with dia-
betes, there was a signiﬁcant 51% reduc-
tion in the treatment group with a target
diastolic blood pressure of <80 mmHg
compared with a target diastolic blood
pressure of <90 mmHg.
Meta-analyses of Trials
To clarify optimal blood pressure targets
in people with diabetes, multiple meta-
analyses have been performed. One
of the largest meta-analyses included
73,913 people with diabetes. Compared
with a less tight blood pressure control,
allocation to a tighter blood pressure
control signiﬁcantly reduced the risk of
stroke by 31% but did not reduce the
risk of MI (37). Another meta-analysis
of 19 trials that included 44,989 individ-
uals showed that a mean blood pres-
sure of 133/76 mmHg is associated with
a 14% risk reduction for major cardio-
vascular events compared with a mean
blood pressure of 140/81 mmHg (31).
This beneﬁt was greatest in people with
diabetes. An analysis of trials including
people with type 2 diabetes and im-
paired glucose tolerance with achieved
systolic blood pressures of <135 mmHg
in the intensive blood pressure treat-
ment group and <140 mmHg in the
standard treatment group revealed a
10% reduction in all-cause mortality and
a 17% reduction in stroke (29). More in-
tensive reduction to <130 mmHg was as-
sociated with a further reduction in stroke
but not other cardiovascular events.
Several meta-analyses stratiﬁed clinical
trials by mean baseline blood pressure or
mean blood pressure attained in the in-
tervention (or intensive treatment) arm.
Based on these analyses, antihyperten-
sive treatment appears to be most bene-
ﬁcial when mean baseline blood pressure
is $140/90 mmHg (17,25,26,28–30). Among
trials with lower baseline or attained
blood pressure, antihypertensive treat-
ment reduced the risk of stroke, reti-
nopathy, and albuminuria, but effects
on other ASCVD outcomes and heart
failure were not evident.
Individualization of Treatment Targets
People with diabetes and clinicians should
engage in a shared decision-making pro-
cess to determine individual blood pressure
targets (17). This approach acknowledges
that the beneﬁts and risks of intensive
blood pressure targets are uncertain and
may vary across individuals and is consis-
tent with a person-focused approach to
care that values individual priorities and
health care professional judgment (38).
Secondary analyses of ACCORD BP and
SPRINTsuggest that clinical factors can help
determine individuals more likely to beneﬁt
and less likely to be harmed by intensive
blood pressure control (39,40).
Absolute beneﬁt from blood pressure
reduction correlated with absolute base-
line cardiovascular risk in SPRINT and in
earlier clinical trials conducted at higher
baseline blood pressure levels (40,41). Ex-
trapolation of these studies suggests that
people with diabetes may also be more
likely to beneﬁt from intensive blood pres-
sure control when they have high absolute
cardiovascular risk.This approach is consis-
tent with guidelines from the American
College of Cardiology and American Heart
Association, which also advocate a blood
pressure target of <130/80 mmHg for all
people, with or without diabetes (18).
Potential adverse effects of antihy-
pertensive therapy (e.g., hypotension,
syncope, falls, AKI, and electrolyte abnor-
malities) should also be taken into account
(32,34,42,43). Individuals with older age,
CKD, and frailty have been shown to be at
higher risk of adverse effects of intensive
blood pressure control (42). In addition, indi-
viduals with orthostatic hypotension, sub-
stantial comorbidity, functional limitations,
S182
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

or polypharmacy may be at high risk of ad-
verse effects, and some individuals may
prefer higher blood pressure targets to en-
hance quality of life. However, ACCORD BP
demonstrated that intensive blood pres-
sure lowering decreased the risk of cardio-
vascular events irrespective of baseline
diastolic blood pressure in individuals who
also received standard glycemic control
(44).Therefore,thepresenceoflowdiastolic
blood pressureis not necessarily acontrain-
dication to more intensive blood pressure
management in the context of otherwise
standard care.
Pregnancy and Antihypertensive Medications
There are few randomized controlled trials
of antihypertensive therapy in pregnant
individuals with diabetes. A 2018 Cochrane
systematic review of antihypertensive ther-
apy for mild to moderate chronic hyper-
tension included 63 trials and over 5,909
women and suggested that antihyperten-
sive therapy probably reduces the risk of
developing severe hypertension but may
not affect the risk of fetal or neonatal
death, small-for-gestational-age babies, or
Table 10.1—Randomized controlled trials of intensive versus standard hypertension treatment strategies
Clinical trial
Population
Intensive
Standard
Outcomes
ACCORD BP (34)
4,733 participants with
T2D aged 40–79
years with prior
evidence of CVD or
multiple
cardiovascular risk
factors
SBP target:
<120 mmHg
Achieved (mean)
SBP/DBP:
119.3/64.4 mmHg
SBP target:
130–140 mmHg
Achieved (mean)
SBP/DBP:
135/70.5 mmHg
 No beneﬁt in primary end point:
composite of nonfatal MI, nonfatal
stroke, and CVD death
 Stroke risk reduced 41% with
intensive control, not sustained
through follow-up beyond the
period of active treatment
 Adverse events more common in
intensive group, particularly
elevated serum creatinine and
electrolyte abnormalities
ADVANCE (35)
11,140 participants
with T2D aged
$55 years with
prior evidence of
CVD or multiple
cardiovascular risk
factors
Intervention: a single-
pill, ﬁxed-dose
combination of
perindopril and
indapamide
Achieved (mean)
SBP/DBP:
136/73 mmHg
Control: placebo
Achieved (mean)
SBP/DBP:
141.6/75.2 mmHg
 Intervention reduced risk of primary
composite end point of major
macrovascular and microvascular
events (9%), death from any cause
(14%), and death from CVD (18%)
 6-year observational follow-up
found reduction in risk of death in
intervention group attenuated but
still signiﬁcant (310)
HOT (36)
18,790 participants,
including 1,501 with
diabetes
DBP target:
#80 mmHg
Achieved (mean):
81.1 mmHg, #80
group; 85.2 mmHg,
#90 group
DBP target:
#90 mmHg
 In the overall trial, there was no
cardiovascular beneﬁt with more
intensive targets
 In the subpopulation with diabetes,
an intensive DBP target was
associated with a signiﬁcantly
reduced risk (51%) of CVD events
SPRINT (42)
9,361 participants
without diabetes
SBP target:
<120 mmHg
Achieved (mean):
121.4 mmHg
SBP target:
<140 mmHg
Achieved (mean):
136.2 mmHg
 Intensive SBP target lowered risk of
the primary composite outcome
25% (MI, ACS, stroke, heart failure,
and death due to CVD)
 Intensive target reduced risk of
death 27%
 Intensive therapy increased risks of
electrolyte abnormalities and AKI
STEP (33)
8,511 participants aged
60–80 years,
including 1,627 with
diabetes
SBP target:
<130 mmHg
Achieved (mean):
127.5 mmHg
SBP target:
<150 mmHg
Achieved (mean):
135.3 mmHg
 Intensive SBP target lowered risk of
the primary composite outcome
26% (stroke, ACS [acute MI and
hospitalization for unstable angina],
acute decompensated heart failure,
coronary revascularization, atrial
ﬁbrillation, or death from
cardiovascular causes)
 Intensive target reduced risk of
cardiovascular death 28%
 Intensive therapy increased risks of
hypotension
ACCORD BP, Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes Blood Pressure trial; ACS, acute coronary syndrome; ADVANCE, Action in Diabe-
tes and Vascular Disease: Preterax and Diamicron MR Controlled Evaluation; AKI, acute kidney injury; CVD, cardiovascular disease; DBP, dia-
stolic blood pressure; HOT, Hypertension Optimal Treatment trial; MI, myocardial infarction; SBP, systolic blood pressure; SPRINT, Systolic
Blood Pressure Intervention Trial; STEP, Strategy of Blood Pressure Intervention in the Elderly Hypertensive Patients; T2D, type 2 diabetes.
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S183
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

preterm birth (45). The Control of Hyper-
tension in Pregnancy Study (CHIPS) (46)
enrolled mostly women with chronic hyper-
tension. In CHIPS, targeting a diastolic blood
pressure of 85 mmHg during pregnancy was
associated with reduced likelihood of devel-
oping accelerated maternal hypertension
and no demonstrable adverse outcome for
infants compared with targeting a higher di-
astolic blood pressure. The mean systolic
blood pressure achieved in the more inten-
sively treated group was 133.1 ± 0.5 mmHg,
and the mean diastolic blood pressure
achieved in that group was 85.3 ±
0.3 mmHg. A similar approach is supported
by the International Society for the Study of
Hypertension in Pregnancy, which speciﬁ-
cally recommends use of antihypertensive
therapy to maintain systolic blood pres-
sure between 110 and 140 mmHg and dia-
stolic blood pressure between 80 and
85 mmHg (47).
The more recent Chronic Hypertension
and Pregnancy (CHAP) trial assigned
pregnant individuals with mild chronic
hypertension to antihypertensive medi-
cations to target a blood pressure goal
of <140/90 mmHg (active treatment group)
or to control treatment, in which antihyper-
tensive therapy was withheld unless severe
hypertension (systolic pressure $160 mmHg
or diastolic pressure $105 mmHg) devel-
oped (control group) (48). The primary
outcome, a composite of preeclampsia with
severe features, medically indicated preterm
birth at <35 weeks of gestation, placental
abruption, or fetal/neonatal death, occurred
in 30.2% of female participants in the active
treatment group versus 37.0% in the control
group (P < 0.001). The mean systolic blood
pressure between randomization and deliv-
ery was 129.5 mmHg in the active treat-
ment group and 132.6 mmHg in the control
group.
Current evidence supports controlling
blood pressure to 110–135/85 mmHg to
reduce the risk of accelerated maternal hy-
pertension but also to minimize impair-
ment of fetal growth. During pregnancy,
treatment with ACE inhibitors, angiotensin
receptor blockers (ARBs), direct renin in-
hibitors, and spironolactone are contrain-
dicated, as they may cause fetal damage.
Special consideration should be taken for
individuals of childbearing potential, and
people intending to become pregnant
should switch from an ACE inhibitor/
ARB or spironolactone to an alternative an-
tihypertensive medication approved during
pregnancy. Antihypertensive drugs known
to be effective and safe in pregnancy in-
clude methyldopa, labetalol, and long-
acting nifedipine, while hydralazine may be
considered in the acute management of
hypertension in pregnancy or severe pre-
eclampsia (49). Diuretics are not recom-
mended for blood pressure control in
pregnancy but may be used during late-
stage pregnancy if needed for volume con-
trol (49,50). The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists also rec-
ommends that
postpartum
individuals
with gestational hypertension, preeclamp-
sia, and superimposed preeclampsia have
their blood pressures observed for 72 h in
the hospital and 7–10 days postpartum.
Long-term follow-up is recommended
for these individuals, as they have in-
creased
lifetime
cardiovascular
risk
(51). See Section 15, “Management of
Diabetes in Pregnancy,” for additional
information.
Treatment Strategies
Lifestyle Intervention
Recommendation
10.6 For people with blood pressure
>120/80 mmHg, lifestyle interven-
tion consists of weight loss when
indicated, a Dietary Approaches to
Stop Hypertension (DASH)–style eat-
ing pattern including reducing sodium
and increasing potassium intake, mod-
eration of alcohol intake, smoking ces-
sation, and increased physical activity. A
Lifestyle management is an important
component of hypertension treatment be-
cause it lowers blood pressure, enhances
the effectiveness of some antihypertensive
medications, promotes other aspects of
metabolic and vascular health, and gener-
ally leads to few adverse effects. Lifestyle
therapy consists of reducing excess body
weight through caloric restriction (see Sec-
tion 8, “Obesity and Weight Management
for the Prevention and Treatment of
Type 2 Diabetes”), at least 150 min of mod-
erate-intensity aerobic activity per week
(see Section 3, “Prevention or Delay of
DiabetesandAssociatedComorbidities”),re-
stricting sodium intake (<2,300 mg/day),
increasing consumption of fruits and veg-
etables (8–10 servings per day) and low-fat
dairy products (2–3 servings per day),
avoiding excessive alcohol consumption
(no more than 2 servings per day in men
and no more than 1 serving per day in
women) (52), and increasing activity lev-
els (53) (see Section 5, “Facilitating
Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being
to Improve Health Outcomes”).
These lifestyle interventions are reason-
able for individuals with diabetes and
mildly elevated blood pressure (systolic
>120 mmHg or diastolic >80 mmHg) and
should be initiated along with pharmaco-
logic therapy when hypertension is diag-
nosed (Fig. 10.2) (53). A lifestyle therapy
plan should be developed in collaboration
with the person with diabetes and dis-
cussed as part of diabetes management.
Use of internet or mobile-based digital
platforms to reinforce healthy behaviors
may be considered as a component of
care, as these interventions have been
found to enhance the efﬁcacy of medical
therapy for hypertension (54,55).
Pharmacologic Interventions
Recommendations
10.7 Individuals with conﬁrmed ofﬁce-
based blood pressure $130/80 mmHg
qualify for initiation and titration of
pharmacologic therapy to achieve the
recommended blood pressure goal of
<130/80 mmHg. A
10.8 Individuals with conﬁrmed ofﬁce-
based blood pressure $150/90 mmHg
should, in addition to lifestyle therapy,
have prompt initiation and timely titra-
tion of two drugs or a single-pill com-
bination of drugs demonstrated to
reduce cardiovascular events in people
with diabetes. A
10.9 Treatment for hypertension should
include drug classes demonstrated to
reduce cardiovascular events in people
with diabetes. A ACE inhibitors or an-
giotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) are
recommended ﬁrst-line therapy for hy-
pertension in people with diabetes and
coronary artery disease. A
10.10 Multiple-drug therapy is gener-
ally required to achieve blood pres-
sure targets. However, combinations
of ACE inhibitors and ARBs and com-
binations of ACE inhibitors or ARBs
(including ARBs/neprilysin inhibitors)
with direct renin inhibitors should not
be used. A
10.11 An ACE inhibitor or ARB, at the
maximum tolerated dose indicated for
blood pressure treatment, is the recom-
mended ﬁrst-line treatment for hyperten-
sion in people with diabetes and urinary
albumin-to-creatinine ratio $300 mg/g
S184
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

creatinine A or 30–299 mg/g creatinine. B
If one class is not tolerated, the other
should be substituted. B
10.12 For adults treated with an ACE
inhibitor, ARB, mineralocorticoid recep-
tor antagonist (MRA), or diuretic, serum
creatinine/estimated glomerular ﬁltra-
tion rate and serum potassium levels
should be monitored within 7–14 days
after initiation of therapy and at least
annually. B
Initial Number of Antihypertensive Medi-
cations. Initial treatment for people with
diabetes depends on the severity of hyper-
tension (Fig. 10.2). Those with blood
pressure between 130/80 mmHg and 150/
90 mmHg may begin with a single drug.
For individuals with blood pressure $150/
90 mmHg, initial pharmacologic treat-
ment with two antihypertensive medica-
tions is recommended in order to more
effectively achieve adequate blood pres-
sure control (56–58). Single-pill antihy-
pertensive combinations may improve
Recommendations for the Treatment of Confirmed
Hypertension in Nonpregnant People With Diabetes
Initial BP ≥ 130/80 and
<150/90 mmHg
Albuminuria or CAD*
No
No
Yes
Yes
Albuminuria or CAD*
Initial BP ≥ 150/90 mmHg
Start one agent
Continue therapy
Continue therapy
Lifestyle management
Start two agents
Assess BP Control and Adverse Effects
Assess BP Control and Adverse Effects
Consider Addition of Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonist;
Refer to Specialist With Expertise in BP Management
Start:
ACEi or ARB
and
CCB† or Diuretic‡
Treatment tolerated
and target achieved
Not meeting target
on two agents
Treatment tolerated
and target achieved
Adverse
effects
Not meeting target
Adverse effects
Not meeting target or
adverse effects using a drug
from each of three classes
Start one drug:
ACEi or ARB
CCB†
Diuretic‡
Start:
ACEi or ARB
Start drug from
2 of 3 options:
ACEi or ARB
CCB†
Diuretic‡
Add agent from
complementary drug class:
ACEi or ARB
CCB†
Diuretic‡
Consider change to
alternative medication:
ACEi or ARB
CCB†
Diuretic‡
REASSESS 
REGULARLY 
(3-6 MONTHS)
Figure 10.2—Recommendations for the treatment of conﬁrmed hypertension in nonpregnant people with diabetes. *An ACE inhibitor (ACEi) or an-
giotensin receptor blocker (ARB) is suggested to treat hypertension for people with coronary artery disease (CAD) or urine albumin-to-creatinine
ratio 30–299 mg/g creatinine and strongly recommended for individuals with urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio $300 mg/g creatinine.
†Dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker (CCB). ‡Thiazide-like diuretic; long-acting agents shown to reduce cardiovascular events, such as chlor-
thalidone and indapamide, are preferred. BP, blood pressure. Adapted from de Boer et al. (18).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S185
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

medication taking in some individuals
(59).
Classes of Antihypertensive Medications.
Initial treatment for hypertension should in-
clude any of the drug classes demonstrated
to reduce cardiovascular events in people
with diabetes: ACE inhibitors (60,61), ARBs
(60,61), thiazide-like diuretics (62), or dihy-
dropyridine calcium channel blockers (63).
In people with diabetes and established
coronary artery disease, ACE inhibitors or
ARBs are recommended ﬁrst-line therapy
for hypertension (64–66). For individu-
als with albuminuria (urine albumin-
to-creatinine ratio [UACR] $30 mg/g),
initial treatment should include an ACE
inhibitor or ARB to reduce the risk of pro-
gressive kidney disease (18) (Fig. 10.2). In in-
dividuals receiving ACE inhibitor or ARB
therapy, continuation of those medications
as kidney function declines to estimated glo-
merular ﬁltration rate (eGFR) <30 mL/min/
1.73 m2 may provide cardiovascular beneﬁt
without signiﬁcantly increasing the risk of
end-stage kidney disease (67). In the ab-
sence of albuminuria, risk of progressive
kidney disease is low, and ACE inhibitors
and ARBs have not been found to afford
superior cardioprotection compared with
thiazide-like diuretics or dihydropyridine
calcium channel blockers (68). b-Blockers
are indicated in the setting of prior MI, ac-
tive angina, or HFrEF but have not been
shown to reduce mortality as blood pres-
sure–lowering agents in the absence of
these conditions (27,69,70).
Multiple-Drug Therapy. Multiple-drug ther-
apy is often required to achieve blood
pressure targets (Fig. 10.2), particularly in
the setting of diabetic kidney disease.
However, the use of both ACE inhibitors
and ARBs in combination, or the combina-
tion of an ACE inhibitor or ARB and a direct
renin inhibitor, is contraindicated given the
lackof added ASCVD beneﬁt and increased
rate of adverse events—namely, hyperka-
lemia, syncope, and AKI (71–73). Titration
of and/or addition of further blood pres-
sure medications should be made in a
timely fashion to overcome therapeutic in-
ertia in achieving blood pressure targets.
Bedtime Dosing. Although prior analyses
of randomized clinical trials found a bene-
ﬁt to evening versus morning dosing of an-
tihypertensive medications (74,75), these
results have not been reproduced in sub-
sequent trials. Therefore, preferential use
of antihypertensives at bedtime is not rec-
ommended (76).
Hyperkalemia and Acute Kidney Injury.
Treatment with ACE inhibitors/ARBs or
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists
(MRAs) can cause AKI and hyperkalemia,
while diuretics can cause AKI and either hy-
pokalemia or hyperkalemia (depending on
mechanism of action) (77,78). Detection
and management of these abnormalities is
important because AKI and hyperkalemia
each increase the risks of cardiovascular
events and death (79). Therefore, serum
creatinine and potassium should be moni-
tored after initiation of treatment with an
ACE inhibitor/ARB, MRA, or diuretic and
monitored during treatment and following
uptitration of these medications, particu-
larly among individuals with reduced glo-
merular ﬁltration who are at increased risk
of hyperkalemia and AKI (77,78,80).
Resistant Hypertension
Recommendation
10.13 Individuals with hypertension
who are not meeting blood pressure
targets on three classes of antihyper-
tensive medications (including a di-
uretic) should be considered for MRA
therapy. A
Resistant hypertension is deﬁned as blood
pressure $140/90 mmHg despite a thera-
peutic strategy that includes appropriate
lifestyle management plus a diuretic and
two other antihypertensive drugs with
complementary mechanisms of action at
adequate doses. Prior to diagnosing resis-
tant hypertension, a number of other
conditions should be excluded, including
missed doses of antihypertensive medi-
cations, white coat hypertension, and
secondary hypertension. People with dia-
betes and conﬁrmed resistant hyperten-
sion should be evaluated for secondary
causes of hypertension, including primary
hyperaldosteroism, renal artery stenosis,
diabetic kidney disease, and obstructive
sleep apnea. In general, barriers to medi-
cation taking (such as cost and side effects)
should be identiﬁed and addressed (Fig.
10.2). MRAs, including spironolactone and
eplerenone, are effective for management
of resistant hypertension in people with
type 2 diabetes when added to existing
treatment with an ACE inhibitor or ARB,
thiazide-like diuretic, or dihydropyridine
calcium channel blocker (81). In addition,
MRAs reduce albuminuria in people with
diabetic nephropathy (82–84). However,
adding an MRA to a treatment plan that
includes an ACE inhibitor or ARB may
increase the risk for hyperkalemia, em-
phasizing the importance of regular
monitoring for serum creatinine and po-
tassium in these individuals, and long-
term outcome studies are needed to
better evaluate the role of MRAs in
blood pressure management.
LIPID MANAGEMENT
Lifestyle Intervention
Recommendations
10.14 Lifestyle modiﬁcation focusing
on weight loss (if indicated); application
of a Mediterranean or DASH eating
pattern; reduction of saturated fat and
trans fat; increase of dietary n-3 fatty
acids, viscous ﬁber, and plant stanol/
sterol intake; and increased physical ac-
tivity should be recommended to im-
prove the lipid proﬁle and reduce the
risk of developing atherosclerotic car-
diovascular disease (ASCVD) in people
with diabetes. A
10.15 Intensify lifestyle therapy and op-
timize glycemic control for people with
diabetes with elevated triglyceride levels
($150 mg/dL [$1.7 mmol/L]) and/or
low HDL cholesterol (<40 mg/dL
[<1.0 mmol/L] for men and <50 mg/dL
[<1.3 mmol/L] for women). C
Lifestyle intervention, including weight
loss in people with overweight or obe-
sity (when appropriate) (85), increased
physical activity, and medical nutrition
therapy, allows some individuals to reduce
ASCVD risk factors. Nutrition intervention
should be tailored according to each per-
son’s age, pharmacologic treatment, lipid
levels, and medical conditions.
Recommendations should focus on ap-
plication of a Mediterranean (83) or Dietary
Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH)
eating pattern, reducing saturated and
trans fat intake, and increasing plant sta-
nol/sterol, n-3 fatty acid, and viscous ﬁber
(such as in oats, legumes, and citrus) intake
(86,87). Glycemic control may also beneﬁ-
cially modify plasma lipid levels, particularly
in people with very high triglycerides and
poor glycemic control. See Section 5,
“Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and
Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes,”
for additional nutrition information.
S186
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Ongoing Therapy and Monitoring
With Lipid Panel
Recommendations
10.16 In adults with prediabetes or
diabetes not taking statins or other
lipid-lowering therapy, it is reasonable
to obtain a lipid proﬁle at the time of
diagnosis, at an initial medical evalua-
tion, annually thereafter, or more fre-
quently if indicated. E
10.17 Obtain a lipid proﬁle at initiation
of statins or other lipid-lowering ther-
apy, 4–12 weeks after initiation or a
change in dose, and annually there-
after, as it may help to monitor the
response to therapy and inform
medication taking. A
In adults with diabetes, it is reasonable to
obtain a lipid proﬁle (total cholesterol,
LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and tri-
glycerides) at the time of diagnosis, at
the initial medical evaluation, and at least
every 5 years thereafter in individuals
<40 years of age. In younger people with
longer duration of disease (such as those
with youth-onset type 1 diabetes), more
frequent lipid proﬁles may be reasonable.
A lipid panel should also be obtained im-
mediately before initiating statin therapy.
Once an individual is taking a statin, LDL
cholesterol levels should be assessed 4–12
weeks after initiation of statin therapy, af-
ter any change in dose, and annually (e.g.,
to monitor for medication taking and efﬁ-
cacy). Monitoring lipid proﬁles after initia-
tion of statin therapy and during therapy
increases dose titration and statin adher-
ence (88–90). If LDL cholesterol levels are
not responding in spite of medication tak-
ing, clinical judgment is recommended to
determine the need for and timing of lipid
panels. In individual patients, the highly
variable LDL cholesterol–lowering response
seen with statins is poorly understood
(91). Clinicians should attempt to ﬁnd a
dose or alternative statin that is tolerable
if side effects occur. There is evidence for
beneﬁt from even extremely low, less
than daily statin doses (92).
STATIN TREATMENT
Primary Prevention
Recommendations
10.18 For people with diabetes aged
40–75 years without ASCVD, use
moderate-intensity statin therapy in
addition to lifestyle therapy. A
10.19
For
people
with
diabetes
aged 20–39 years with additional
ASCVD risk factors, it may be rea-
sonable to initiate statin therapy in
addition to lifestyle therapy. C
10.20 For people with diabetes aged
40–75 years at higher cardiovascular
risk, including those with one or more
ASCVD risk factors, it is recommended
to use high-intensity statin therapy
to reduce LDL cholesterol by $50%
of baseline and to target an LDL
cholesterol goal of <70 mg/dL
(<1.8 mmol/L). A
10.21 For people with diabetes aged
40–75 years at higher cardiovascular
risk, especially those with multiple
ASCVD risk factors and an LDL cho-
lesterol $70 mg/dL ($1.8 mmol/L),
it may be reasonable to add ezetimibe
or a PCSK9 inhibitor to maximum tol-
erated statin therapy. B
10.22 In adults with diabetes aged
>75 years already on statin therapy,
it is reasonable to continue statin
treatment. B
10.23 In adults with diabetes aged
>75 years, it may be reasonable to
initiate moderate-intensity statin ther-
apy after discussion of potential ben-
eﬁts and risks. C
10.24 In people with diabetes intol-
erant to statin therapy, treatment
with bempedoic acid is recommended
to reduce cardiovascular event rates
as an alternative cholesterol-lowering
plan. A
10.25 Statin therapy is contraindi-
cated in pregnancy. B
Secondary Prevention
Recommendations
10.26 For people of all ages with di-
abetes and ASCVD, high-intensity
statin therapy should be added to
lifestyle therapy. A
10.27 For people with diabetes and
ASCVD, treatment with high-intensity
statin therapy is recommended to
target an LDL cholesterol reduction
of $50% from baseline and an
LDL cholesterol goal of <55 mg/dL
(<1.4 mmol/L). Addition of ezetimibe
or a PCSK9 inhibitor with proven ben-
eﬁt
in
this
population
is
recom-
mended if this goal is not achieved on
maximum tolerated statin therapy. B
10.28a For individuals who do not
tolerate the intended statin inten-
sity, the maximum tolerated statin
dose should be used. E
10.28b For people with diabetes
and ASCVD intolerant to statin ther-
apy, PCSK9 inhibitor therapy with
monoclonal antibody treatment, A
bempedoic
acid
therapy,
A
or
PCSK9 inhibitor therapy with incli-
siran siRNA E should be considered
as an alternative cholesterol-lower-
ing therapy.
Initiating Statin Therapy Based on Risk
People with type 2 diabetes have an in-
creased prevalence of lipid abnormali-
ties, contributing to their high risk of
ASCVD. Multiple clinical trials have dem-
onstrated the beneﬁcial effects of statin
therapy on ASCVD outcomes in subjects
with and without CHD (93,94). Sub-
group analyses of people with diabetes
in larger trials (95–99) and trials in
people with diabetes (100,101) showed
signiﬁcant primary and secondary preven-
tion of ASCVD events and CHD death in
people with diabetes. Meta-analyses in-
cluding data from over 18,000 people with
diabetes from 14 randomized trials of
statin therapy (mean follow-up 4.3 years)
demonstrated a 9% proportional reduction
in all-cause mortality and 13% reduction
in vascular mortality for each 1 mmol/L
(39 mg/dL) reduction in LDL cholesterol
(102). The cardiovascular beneﬁt in this
large meta-analysis did not depend on
baseline LDL cholesterol levels and was lin-
early related to the LDL cholesterol reduc-
tion without a low threshold beyond
which there was no beneﬁt observed
(102).
Accordingly, statins are the drugs of
choice for LDL cholesterol lowering and
cardioprotection. Table 10.2 shows the
two statin dosing intensities that are
recommended for use in clinical prac-
tice: high-intensity statin therapy will
achieve an approximately $50% reduc-
tion in LDL cholesterol, and moderate-
intensity statin plans achieve 30–49%
reductions in LDL cholesterol. Low-dose
statin therapy is generally not recom-
mended in people with diabetes but is
sometimes the only dose of statin that
an individual can tolerate. For individu-
als who do not tolerate the intended
intensity of statin, the maximum toler-
ated statin dose should be used.
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S187
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

As in those without diabetes, abso-
lute reductions in ASCVD outcomes
(CHD death and nonfatal MI) are great-
est in people with high baseline ASCVD
risk (known ASCVD and/or very high
LDL cholesterol levels), but the overall
beneﬁts of statin therapy in people with
diabetes at moderate or even low risk
for ASCVD are convincing (103,104). The
relative beneﬁt of lipid-lowering therapy
has been uniform across most sub-
groups tested (94,102), including sub-
groups that varied with respect to age
and other risk factors.
Primary Prevention (People Without ASCVD)
For primary prevention, moderate-dose
statin
therapy
is
recommended
for
those aged $40 years (96,103,104), al-
though high-intensity therapy should be
considered in the context of additional
ASCVD risk factors. The evidence is strong
for people with diabetes aged 40–75
years, an age-group well represented in
statin trials showing beneﬁt. Since cardio-
vascular risk is enhanced in people with
diabetes, as noted above, individuals who
also have multiple other coronary risk fac-
tors have increased risk, equivalent to
that of those with ASCVD. Therefore, cur-
rent guidelines recommend that in peo-
ple with diabetes who are at higher
cardiovascular risk, especially those with
one or more ASCVD risk factors, high-
intensity statin therapy should be pre-
scribed to reduce LDL cholesterol by
$50% from baseline and to target an LDL
cholesterol of <70 mg/dL (<1.8 mmol/L)
(105–107). Since, in clinical practice, it is
frequently difﬁcult to ascertain the base-
line LDL cholesterol level prior to statin
therapy initiation, in those individuals, a fo-
cus on an LDL cholesterol target level of
<70 mg/dL (<1.8 mmol/L) rather than
the percent reduction in LDL cholesterol
is recommended. In those individuals, it
may also be reasonable to add ezetimibe
or proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin
type 9 (PCSK9) inhibitor therapy to maxi-
mum tolerated statin therapy if needed
to reduce LDL cholesterol levels by
$50% and to achieve the recommended
LDL cholesterol target of <70 mg/dL
(<1.8 mmol/L) (108). While there are no
randomized controlled trials speciﬁcally as-
sessing cardiovascular outcomes of adding
ezetimibe or PCSK9 inhibitors to statin
therapy in primary prevention, the Open-
Label Study of Long-term Evaluation
Against LDL Cholesterol (OSLER) study in-
cluded 80% of study participants with-
out established cardiovascular disease. In
the treatment group, LDL cholesterol was
reduced by 61%, and, although explor-
atory and not a primary outcome, cardio-
vascular events were reduced by 18% in
the standard-therapy group to 0.95% in
the evolocumab group (HR in the evolo-
cumab group 0.47 [95% CI 0.28–0.78];
P = 0.003) (109). Similarly, the Long-term
Safety and Tolerability of Alirocumab in
High Cardiovascular Risk Patients With
Hypercholesterolemia
Not
Adequately
Controlled
With
Their
Lipid-Modifying
Therapy (ODYSSEY LONG TERM) included
30% of study participants without es-
tablished cardiovascular disease and 33%
of people with diabetes. Alirocumab
added to statin therapy reduced LDL
cholesterol by 62% and major adverse
cardiovascular events in a post hoc anal-
ysis (1.7% vs. 3.3% compared with pla-
cebo;
HR
0.52
[95%
CI
0.31–0.90];
nominal P = 0.02) (110). In addition, a
meta-analysis suggests that there is a car-
diovascular beneﬁt of adding ezetimibe
or PCSK9 inhibitors to treatment for
high-risk people (111). The evidence is
lesser for individuals aged >75 years; rel-
atively few older people with diabetes
have been enrolled in primary prevention
trials. However, heterogeneity by age has
not been seen in the relative beneﬁt of
lipid-lowering therapy in trials that in-
cluded older participants (94,101,102),
and because older age confers higher
risk, the absolute beneﬁts are actually
greater
(94,112).
Moderate-intensity
statin therapy is recommended in people
with diabetes who are $75 years of age.
However, the risk-beneﬁt proﬁle should
be routinely evaluated in this population,
with downward titration of dose per-
formed as needed. See Section 13,
“Older Adults,” for more details on clini-
cal considerations for this population.
Age <40 Years and/or Type 1 Diabetes. Very
little clinical trial evidence exists for
people with type 2 diabetes under the
age of 40 years or for people with type 1
diabetes of any age. For pediatric recom-
mendations, see Section 14, “Children
and Adolescents.” In the Heart Protection
Study (lower age limit 40 years), the
subgroup of 600 people with type 1
diabetes had a reduction in risk propor-
tionately similar, although not statistically
signiﬁcant, to that in people with type 2
diabetes (96). Even though the data are
not deﬁnitive, similar statin treatment
approaches should be considered for
people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes, par-
ticularly in the presence of other cardiovas-
cular risk factors. Individuals <40 years
of age have lower risk of developing a car-
diovascular event over a 10-year horizon;
however, their lifetime risk of developing
cardiovascular disease and suffering an MI,
stroke, or cardiovascular death is high. For
people who are <40 years of age and/or
have type 1 diabetes with other ASCVD
risk factors, it is recommended that the in-
dividual and health care professional dis-
cuss the relative beneﬁts and risks and
consider the use of moderate-intensity
statin therapy. Please refer to “Type 1 Dia-
betes Mellitus and Cardiovascular Disease:
A Scientiﬁc Statement From the American
Heart Association and American Diabetes
Association” (113) for additional discussion.
Secondary Prevention (People With ASCVD)
Because cardiovascular event rates are
increased in people with diabetes and
established ASCVD, intensive therapy is
indicated and has been shown to be of
beneﬁt in multiple large meta-analyses
and randomized cardiovascular outcomes
trials (94,102,112,114,115). High-intensity
statin therapy is recommended for all peo-
ple with diabetes and ASCVD to target an
Table 10.2—High-intensity and moderate-intensity statin therapy
High-intensity statin therapy
(lowers LDL cholesterol by $50%)
Moderate-intensity statin therapy
(lowers LDL cholesterol by 30–49%)
Atorvastatin 40–80 mg
Atorvastatin 10–20 mg
Rosuvastatin 20–40 mg
Rosuvastatin 5–10 mg
Simvastatin 20–40 mg
Pravastatin 40–80 mg
Lovastatin 40 mg
Fluvastatin XL 80 mg
Pitavastatin 1–4 mg
Once-daily dosing. XL, extended release.
S188
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

LDL cholesterol reduction of $50% from
baseline and an LDL cholesterol goal of
<55 mg/dL (<1.4 mmol/L). Based on
the evidence discussed below, addition
of ezetimibe or a PCSK9 inhibitor is rec-
ommended if this goal is not achieved
on maximum tolerated statin therapy.
These recommendations are based on
the observation that high-intensity ver-
sus moderate-intensity statin therapy
reduces cardiovascular event rates in
high-risk individuals with established car-
diovascular disease in randomized trials
(98,114). In addition, the Cholesterol
Treatment Trialists’ Collaboration, involv-
ing 26 statin trials, of which 5 compared
high-intensity versus moderate-intensity
statins (102), showed a 21% reduction in
major cardiovascular events in people with
diabetes for every 39 mg/dL (1 mmol/L) of
LDL cholesterol lowering, irrespective of
baseline LDL cholesterol or individual char-
acteristics (102). However, the best evi-
dence to support lower LDL cholesterol
targets in people with diabetes and estab-
lished cardiovascular disease derives from
multiple large randomized trials investigat-
ing the beneﬁts of adding nonstatin agents
to statin therapy. As discussed in detail be-
low, these include combination treatment
with statins and ezetimibe (112,116) or
PCSK9 inhibitors (115,117–119). Each trial
found a signiﬁcant beneﬁt in the reduction
of ASCVD events that was directly related
to the degree of further LDL cholesterol
lowering. These large trials included a
signiﬁcant number of participants with dia-
betes and prespeciﬁed analyses on cardio-
vascular outcomes in people with and
without diabetes (116,118,119). The deci-
sion to add a nonstatin agent should be
made following a discussion between a
clinician and a person with diabetes about
the net beneﬁt, safety, and cost of combi-
nation therapy.
Combination Therapy for LDL
Cholesterol Lowering
Statins and Ezetimibe
The IMProved Reduction of Outcomes: Vy-
torin Efﬁcacy International Trial (IMPROVE-
IT) was a randomized controlled trial in
18,144 individuals comparing the addition
of ezetimibe to simvastatin therapy ver-
sus simvastatin alone (112). Individuals
were $50 years of age, had experienced
a recent acute coronary syndrome, and
were treated for an average of 6 years.
Overall, the addition of ezetimibe led to a
6.4% relative beneﬁt and a 2% absolute
reduction in major adverse cardiovascular
events
(atherosclerotic
cardiovascular
events), with the degree of beneﬁt be-
ing directly proportional to the change
in LDL cholesterol, which was 70 mg/dL
(1.8 mmol/L) in the statin group on av-
erage and 54 mg/dL (1.4 mmol/L) in the
combination group (112). In those with
diabetes (27% of participants), the com-
bination of moderate-intensity simva-
statin (40 mg) and ezetimibe (10 mg)
showed a signiﬁcant reduction of major
adverse cardiovascular events with an
absolute risk reduction of 5% (40% vs.
45% cumulative incidence at 7 years)
and a relative risk reduction of 14% (HR
0.86 [95% CI 0.78–0.94]) over moderate-
intensity simvastatin (40 mg) alone
(116).
Statins and PCSK9 Inhibitors
Placebo-controlled trials evaluating the
addition of the PCSK9 inhibitors evolo-
cumab and alirocumab to maximum
tolerated doses of statin therapy in par-
ticipants who were at high risk for
ASCVD demonstrated an average reduc-
tion in LDL cholesterol ranging from 36 to
59%. These agents have been approved as
adjunctive therapy for individuals with
ASCVD or familial hypercholesterolemia
who are receiving maximum tolerated
statin therapy but require additional
lowering of LDL cholesterol (120,121).
No cardiovascular outcome trials have
been performed to assess whether PCSK9
inhibitor therapy reduces ASCVD event
rates in individuals without established
cardiovascular disease (primary prevention).
The effects of PCSK9 inhibition on
ASCVD outcomes were investigated in
the Further Cardiovascular Outcomes
Research With PCSK9 Inhibition in Sub-
jects With Elevated Risk (FOURIER) trial,
which enrolled 27,564 individuals with
prior ASCVD and an additional high-risk
feature who were receiving their maxi-
mum tolerated statin therapy (two-thirds
were on high-intensity statin) but who
still had LDL cholesterol $70 mg/dL
($1.8 mmol/L) or non-HDL cholesterol
$100 mg/dL ($2.6 mmol/L) (115). Indi-
viduals were randomized to receive
subcutaneous injections of evolocumab
(either 140 mg every 2 weeks or 420 mg
every month based on individual prefer-
ence) versus placebo. Evolocumab re-
duced LDL cholesterol by 59% from a
median of 92 down to 30 mg/dL in the
treatment arm.
During
the
median
follow-up
of
2.2 years, the composite outcome of
cardiovascular death, MI, stroke, hospi-
talization for angina, or revascularization
occurred in 11.3% vs. 9.8% of the pla-
cebo and evolocumab groups, respec-
tively, representing a 15% relative risk
reduction (P < 0.001). The combined
end point of cardiovascular death, MI,
or stroke was reduced by 20%, from 7.4
to 5.9% (P < 0.001). Evolocumab ther-
apy also signiﬁcantly reduced all strokes
(1.5% vs. 1.9%; HR 0.79 [95% CI 0.66–0.95];
P = 0.01) and ischemic stroke (1.2% vs.
1.6%; HR 0.75 [95% CI 0.62–0.92]; P =
0.005) in the total population, with
ﬁndings being consistent in individuals
with or without a history of ischemic
stroke at baseline (122). Importantly,
similar beneﬁts were seen in a prespe-
ciﬁed subgroup of people with diabe-
tes, comprising 11,031 individuals (40%
of the trial) (119).
In
the
ODYSSEY
OUTCOMES
trial
(Evaluation of Cardiovascular Outcomes
After an Acute Coronary Syndrome Dur-
ing Treatment With Alirocumab), 18,924
individuals (28.8% of whom had diabe-
tes) with recent acute coronary syn-
drome were randomized to the PCSK9
inhibitor alirocumab or placebo every
2 weeks in addition to maximum toler-
ated statin therapy, with alirocumab
dosing titrated between 75 and 150 mg
to achieve LDL cholesterol levels be-
tween 25 and 50 mg/dL (117). Over a
median follow-up of 2.8 years, a com-
posite primary end point (comprising
death from CHD, nonfatal MI, fatal or
nonfatal ischemic stroke, or unstable
angina requiring hospital admission) oc-
curred in 903 individuals (9.5%) in the
alirocumab group and in 1,052 individu-
als (11.1%) in the placebo group (HR
0.85 [95% CI 0.78–0.93]; P < 0.001).
Combination therapy with alirocumab
plus statin therapy resulted in a greater
absolute reduction in the incidence of
the primary end point in people with di-
abetes (2.3% [95% CI 0.4–4.2]) than in
those with prediabetes (1.2% [0.0–2.4])
or normoglycemia (1.2% [–0.3 to 2.7])
(118).
In addition to monoclonal antibodies
targeting PCSK9, the siRNA inclisiran has
been developed and has recently become
available in the U.S. In the Inclisiran for
Participants With Atherosclerotic Cardio-
vascular Disease and Elevated Low-density
Lipoprotein Cholesterol (ORION-10) and
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S189
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Inclisiran for Subjects With ASCVD or
ASCVD-Risk Equivalents and Elevated Low-
density Lipoprotein Cholesterol (ORION-11)
trials (123), individuals with established car-
diovascular disease or ASCVD risk equivalent
were randomized to receive inclisiran or
placebo. Inclisiran allows less frequent
administration compared with monoclonal
antibodies and was administered on day 1,
on day 90, and every 6 months in these
trials. In the ORION-10 trial, 47.5% of indi-
viduals in the inclisiran group and 42.4% in
the placebo group had diabetes; in the
ORION-11 trial, 36.5% of individuals in the
inclisiran group and 33.7% in the placebo
group had diabetes. The coprimary end
point of placebo-corrected percent change
in LDL cholesterol level from baseline to
day 510 was 52.3% in the ORION-10 trial
and 49.9% in the ORION-11 trial. In an
exploratory analysis, the prespeciﬁed car-
diovascular end point, deﬁned as a cardio-
vascular basket of nonadjudicated terms,
including those classiﬁed within cardiac
death, and any signs or symptoms of car-
diac arrest, nonfatal MI, or stroke, occurred
in 7.4% of the inclisiran group and 10.2% of
the placebo group in the ORION-10 trial
and in 7.8% of the inclisiran group and
10.3% of the placebo group in the ORION-11
trial. A cardiovascular outcome trial using
inclisiran in people with established car-
diovascular disease is currently ongoing
(124).
Intolerance to Statin Therapy
Statin therapy is a hallmark approach
to cardiovascular prevention and treat-
ment; however, a subset of individuals
experience partial (inability to tolerate
sufﬁcient dosage necessary to achieve
therapeutic objectives due to adverse
effects) or complete (inability to toler-
ate any dose) intolerance to statin ther-
apy (125). Although the deﬁnition of
statin intolerance differs between organi-
zations and within clinical study methods,
these individuals will require an alterna-
tive treatment approach. Initial steps in
people intolerant to statins may include
switching to a different high-intensity
statin if a high-intensity statin is indi-
cated, switching to moderate-intensity or
low-intensity statin, lowering the statin
dose, or using nondaily dosing of statins.
While considering these alternative treat-
ment plans, the addition of nonstatin
treatment plans to maximum tolerated
statin therapy should be considered, as
these are frequently associated with
improved adherence and target LDL cho-
lesterol goal achievement (125).
PCSK9 Inhibition
The PCSK9 monoclonal antibodies aliro-
cumab and evolocumab have both been
studied within populations considered
statin intolerant. The Study of Alirocumab
in Patients With Primary Hypercholester-
olemia and Moderate, High, or Very High
Cardiovascular Risk, Who Are Intolerant
to Statins (ODYSSEY ALTERNATIVE) trial
evaluated the LDL cholesterol–lowering
efﬁcacy of alirocumab compared with
ezetimibe in addition to the safety
of each of the prior two treatments
compared with a statin rechallenge arm
with 20 mg atorvastatin in 314 individu-
als with primary hypercholesterolemia
and statin intolerance. The proportion of
the study population with type 2 diabe-
tes was 24%. After the 24 weeks, aliro-
cumab lowered LDL cholesterol levels by
54.8% compared with 20.1% with ezeti-
mibe. Although there were similar rates
of any adverse event for all treatments,
there were fewer events that led to
treatment discontinuation for alirocu-
mab (18.3% vs. 25.0% for ezetimibe
and 25.4% for atorvastatin) as well as
fewer skeletal muscle–related adverse
events (32.5% vs. 41.1% with ezetimibe
and 46% with atorvastatin) (126). Indi-
viduals in all treatment arms were of-
fered the opportunity of an open-label
extension phase, in which all received
alirocumab for 3 years. LDL cholesterol
reductions of more than 50% were either
achieved or maintained for the 281 indi-
viduals who either continued with or
switched to alirocumab for the extension
phase, and these reductions were sus-
tained throughout the treatment period
(127).
Evolocumab was evaluated for its
safety and efﬁcacy in people with statin
intolerance in the Goal Achievement Af-
ter Utilizing an Anti-PCSK9 Antibody in
Statin Intolerant Subjects 1, 2, and 3
(GAUSS 1, 2, and 3) trials as well as the
OSLER open-label extension of the GAUSS
1 and 2 trials. There were 160 and 307
individuals in the GAUSS 1 and 2 trials, re-
spectively, who were randomized to vari-
ous doses of evolocumab plus ezetimibe
10 mg or ezetimibe 10 mg plus placebo
injection for 12 weeks. Reductions in LDL
cholesterol ranged from 41% to 63%
(depending on the dose) for evolocumab/
ezetimibe compared with 15% to 18% for
ezetimibe/placebo. Similar to what was
found in the alirocumab studies, musculo-
skeletal adverse effects occurred in fewer
of those treated with evolocumab/
ezetimibe than with ezetimibe/placebo,
although rates of discontinuation were
similar (5% and 6%, respectively) due to
these effects. Use of low-dose statins
was allowed in these studies and was as-
sociated with an increase in the inci-
dence of musculoskeletal adverse effects
(128,129). One hundred twenty-eight in-
dividuals from the GAUSS 1 trial were
rerandomized to evolocumab (420 mg
monthly) plus standard of care compared
with the standard of care for 1 year, and
then all participants were treated with
420 mg of evolocumab monthly plus
standard of care. Two hundred ﬁfty-four
individuals were rerandomized into two
dosing options of evolocumab (140 mg
biweekly or 420 mg monthly) compared
with standard of care for 1 year, and
then all were continued on 420 mg monthly
for an additional year. After 1 year, the LDL
cholesterol was reduced from baseline
(beginning of the GAUSS 1 or 2 trial) by a
mean of 57% in those treated with evolo-
cumab compared with 13% with the stan-
dard of care, with a 59% reduction (from
baseline) by the end of year 2. Fourteen
percent of participants in the extension
trials experienced musculoskeletal adverse
effects; however, these effects did not
lead to any participant discontinuing the
trials (130). Similar LDL cholesterol reduc-
tions were demonstrated in the GAUSS 3
trial after 24 weeks (54.5% with evo-
locumab compared with –16.7% with
ezetimibe), with slightly higher rates of
musculoskeletal adverse events (20.7%
with evolocumab and 28.8% with ezeti-
mibe). The higher rates of these adverse
events may be due in part to the ﬁrst
phase of this trial, which randomized in-
dividuals to a statin rechallenge with ei-
ther atorvastatin or placebo (131).
Inclisiran has also been proposed as
an option for individuals with statin
intolerance. Although most individuals
(90–95%) in the later ORION-10 and
ORION-11 trials were on statin therapy
(123), the Trial to Evaluate the Effect of
ALN-PCSSC Treatment on Low-density Li-
poprotein Cholesterol (ORION-1) included
individuals with documented statin intoler-
ance. The percentages of individuals not
taking statins were 26% of the 253 who re-
ceived either a single injection of inclisiran
or placebo and 28% of the 248 who
S190
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

received two injections of inclisiran or
placebo. Both groups were followed for
1 year to assess the durability of the
initial (30–45%, dose-dependent) low-
ering of LDL cholesterol. Almost all individ-
uals treated with inclisiran maintained their
LDL cholesterol levels at 180 days; how-
ever, the levels returned to within 20%
change from the baseline for 17–52% of
individuals, and response depended on
both the number and strength of the incli-
siran dose(s) received (132). A proportion
of these individuals continued into the
open-label Extension Trial of Inclisiran in
Participants With Cardiovascular Disease
and High Cholesterol (ORION-3), in which
they returned to inclisiran 300 mg given
every 6 months and were compared with
individuals given placebo in ORION-1 and
those
who
were
given
evolocumab
140 mg every 2 weeks for 1 year and then
transitioned to inclisiran. The change in LDL
cholesterol levels was compared with the
baseline, which was deﬁned as the base-
line for the ORION-1 trial for those initially
treated with inclisiran (as they were incli-
sarin naive at that point) or the start of the
ORION-3 trial for those previously treated
with placebo. It is important to note that
of the ORION-3 participants, only 23% had
diabetes and 33% were not taking statin
therapy. Both arms maintained an LDL
cholesterol reduction of 45% through
the end of year 4 (133). The signiﬁcant
response was seen across the groups
during the ORION-1 trial and in the
ORION-3 extension, and it may be ex-
pected that those with statin intolerance
experienced a response similar to the re-
sponse of those on statin therapy; how-
ever, evaluation of response based on
background lipid-lowering therapy was
not described.
Bempedoic Acid
Bempedoic acid is a novel LDL choles-
terol–lowering agent that is indicated as
an adjunct to diet and maximum toler-
ated statin therapy for the treatment of
adults with heterozygous familial hyper-
cholesterolemia or established ASCVD
who require additional lowering of LDL
cholesterol. A pooled analysis suggests
that bempedoic acid therapy lowers LDL
cholesterol levels by about 23% com-
pared with placebo (134). This agent
should be considered for individuals
who cannot use or tolerate other evi-
dence-based LDL cholesterol–lowering
approaches or for whom those other
therapies
are
inadequately
effective
(135). The Evaluation of Major Cardio-
vascular Events in Patients With, or at
High Risk for, Cardiovascular Disease
Who Are Statin Intolerant Treated With
Bempedoic Acid or Placebo (CLEAR Out-
comes) trial evaluated the impact of
bempedoic acid on cardiovascular events
for individuals with established ASCVD
(70% of population) or at high risk for
ASCVD (30% of population) and consid-
ered to be intolerant to statin therapy.
It is important to note that 19% of
individuals were on very-low-dose statin
therapy at baseline. Bempedoic acid was
found to reduce the composite outcome
of four-point major adverse cardiovascular
events by 13% compared with placebo
(136) The HR for the primary outcome was
more reduced in the primary prevention
group (HR 0.68 [95% CI 0.53–0.87]) com-
pared with the secondary prevention group
of individuals with established cardiovascu-
lar disease (HR 0.91 [95% CI 0.81–1.01]). In
addition, in a preplanned subanalysis of
the primary prevention population, the use
of bempedoic acid resulted in a 30% re-
duction in primary composite outcome
compared with placebo (137).
Treatment of Other Lipoprotein
Fractions or Targets
Recommendations
10.29 For individuals with fasting
triglyceride
levels
$500
mg/dL
($5.7 mmol/L), evaluate for sec-
ondary causes of hypertriglyceride-
mia and consider medical therapy
to reduce the risk of pancreatitis. C
10.30 In adults with moderate hyper-
triglyceridemia (fasting or nonfasting
triglycerides 175–499 mg/dL [2.0–5.6
mmol/L]), clinicians should address and
treat lifestyle factors (obesity and meta-
bolic syndrome), secondary factors (dia-
betes, chronic liver or kidney disease
and/or nephrotic syndrome, and hypo-
thyroidism), and medications that raise
triglycerides. C
10.31 In individuals with ASCVD or
other cardiovascular risk factors on a
statin with controlled LDL cholesterol
but elevated triglycerides (135–499
mg/dL [1.5–5.6 mmol/L]), the addition
of icosapent ethyl can be considered
to reduce cardiovascular risk. A
Hypertriglyceridemia should be addressed
with dietary and lifestyle changes including
weight loss and abstinence from alcohol
(138). Severe hypertriglyceridemia (fasting
triglycerides $500 mg/dL and especially
>1,000 mg/dL) may warrant pharmaco-
logic therapy (ﬁbric acid derivatives and/or
ﬁsh oil) and reduction in dietary fat to re-
duce the risk of acute pancreatitis. Moder-
ate- or high-intensity statin therapy should
also be used as indicated to reduce risk of
cardiovascular events (see STATIN TREATMENT).
In people with moderate hypertriglyceride-
mia, lifestyle interventions, treatment of
secondary factors, and avoidance of
medications that might raise trigly-
cerides are recommended.
The Reduction of Cardiovascular Events
with Icosapent Ethyl-Intervention Trial
(REDUCE-IT) enrolled 8,179 adults re-
ceiving statin therapy with moderately
elevated triglycerides (135–499 mg/dL,
median baseline of 216 mg/dL) who
had either established cardiovascular
disease (secondary prevention cohort)
or diabetes plus at least one other car-
diovascular risk factor (primary preven-
tion cohort) (139). Individuals were
randomized to icosapent ethyl 4 g/day
(2 g twice daily with food) versus pla-
cebo.The trial met its primary end point,
demonstrating a 25% relative risk reduc-
tion (P < 0.001) for the primary end
point composite of cardiovascular death,
nonfatal MI, nonfatal stroke, coronary re-
vascularization, or unstable angina. This
risk reduction was seen in people with or
without diabetes at baseline.The compos-
ite of cardiovascular death, nonfatal MI,
or nonfatal stroke was reduced by 26%
(P < 0.001). Additional ischemic end
points were signiﬁcantly lower in the ico-
sapent ethyl group than in the placebo
group, including cardiovascular death,
which was reduced by 20% (P = 0.03).
The proportions of individuals experienc-
ing adverse events and serious adverse
events were similar between the active
and placebo treatment groups. It should
be noted that data are lacking for other n-3
fatty acids, and results of the REDUCE-IT
trial should not be extrapolated to other
products (139). As an example, the addi-
tion of 4 g per day of a carboxylic acid
formulation of the n-3 fatty acids eicosa-
pentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexae-
noic acid (DHA) (n-3 carboxylic acid) to
statin therapy in individuals with athero-
genic dyslipidemia and high cardiovascu-
lar risk, 70% of whom had diabetes, did
not reduce the risk of major adverse
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S191
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

cardiovascular events compared with the
inert comparator of corn oil (140).
Low levels of HDL cholesterol, often
associated with elevated triglyceride
levels, are the most prevalent pattern of
dyslipidemia in people with type 2 diabe-
tes. However, the evidence for the use of
drugs that target these lipid fractions is
substantially less robust than that for
statin therapy (141). In a large trial in
people with diabetes, fenoﬁbrate failed
to reduce overall cardiovascular outcomes
(142).
Other Combination Therapy
Recommendations
10.32 Statin plus ﬁbrate combina-
tion therapy has not been shown to
improve ASCVD outcomes and is
generally not recommended. A
10.33 Statin plus niacin combination
therapy has not been shown to pro-
vide additional cardiovascular bene-
ﬁt above statin therapy alone, may
increase the risk of stroke with ad-
ditional side effects, and is gener-
ally not recommended. A
Statin and Fibrate Combination Therapy
Combination therapy (statin and ﬁbrate)
is associated with an increased risk for
abnormal transaminase levels, myositis,
and rhabdomyolysis. The risk of rhabdo-
myolysis is more common with higher
doses of statins and renal insufﬁciency
and appears to be higher when statins
are combined with gemﬁbrozil (com-
pared with fenoﬁbrate) (143).
In the ACCORD study, in people with
type 2 diabetes who were at high risk for
ASCVD, the combination of fenoﬁbrate
and simvastatin did not reduce the rate of
fatal cardiovascular events, nonfatal MI, or
nonfatal stroke compared with simva-
statin alone. Prespeciﬁed subgroup analy-
ses suggested heterogeneity in treatment
effects with possible beneﬁt for men with
both a triglyceride level $204 mg/dL
($2.3 mmol/L) and an HDL cholesterol
level #34 mg/dL (#0.9 mmol/L) (144).
Statin and Niacin Combination Therapy
The Atherothrombosis Intervention in
Metabolic Syndrome With Low HDL/High
Triglycerides: Impact on Global Health
Outcomes (AIM-HIGH) trial random-
ized over 3,000 people (about one-
third with diabetes) with established
ASCVD, LDL cholesterol levels <180 mg/dL
(<4.7 mmol/L), low HDL cholesterol lev-
els (men <40 mg/dL [<1.0 mmol/L] and
women <50 mg/dL [<1.3 mmol/L]), and
triglyceride levels of 150–400 mg/dL
(1.7–4.5 mmol/L) to statin therapy plus
extended-release niacin or placebo. The
trial was halted early due to lack of efﬁ-
cacy on the primary ASCVD outcome (ﬁrst
event of the composite of death from
CHD, nonfatal MI, ischemic stroke, hospi-
talization for an acute coronary syndrome,
or symptom-driven coronary or cerebral re-
vascularization) and a possible increase in
ischemic stroke in those on combination
therapy (145).
The much larger Heart Protection Study
2–Treatment of HDL to Reduce the Inci-
dence of Vascular Events (HPS2-THRIVE)
trial also failed to show a beneﬁt of adding
niacin to background statin therapy (146).
A total of 25,673 individuals with prior vas-
cular disease were randomized to receive
2 g of extended-release niacin and 40 mg
of laropiprant (an antagonist of the prosta-
glandin D2 receptor DP1 that has been
shown to improve participation in niacin
therapy) versus a matching placebo daily
and followed for a median follow-up period
of 3.9 years.There was no signiﬁcant differ-
ence in the rate of coronary death, MI,
stroke, or coronary revascularization with
the addition of niacin–laropiprant versus
placebo (13.2% vs. 13.7%; rate ratio 0.96;
P = 0.29). Niacin–laropiprant was associated
with an increased incidence of new-onset
diabetes (absolute excess, 1.3 percentage
points; P < 0.001) and disturbances in
diabetes management among those with
diabetes. In addition, there was an increase
in serious adverse events associated with
the gastrointestinal system, musculoskele-
tal system, skin, and, unexpectedly, infec-
tion and bleeding.
Therefore, combination therapy with
a statin and niacin is not recommended,
given the lack of efﬁcacy on major ASCVD
outcomes and increased side effects.
Diabetes Risk With Statin Use
Several studies have reported a mod-
estly increased risk of incident type 2 di-
abetes with statin use (147,148), which
may be limited to those with diabetes
risk factors. An analysis of one of the
initial studies suggested that although
statin use was associated with diabetes
risk, the cardiovascular event rate re-
duction with statins far outweighed
the risk of incident diabetes, even for
individuals at highest risk for diabetes
(149). The absolute risk increase was
small (over 5 years of follow-up, 1.2% of
participants on placebo developed dia-
betes and 1.5% on rosuvastatin devel-
oped diabetes) (149). A meta-analysis of
13 randomized statin trials with 91,140
participants showed an odds ratio of 1.09
for a new diagnosis of diabetes, so that
(on average) treatment of 255 individuals
with statins for 4 years resulted in one
additional case of diabetes while simulta-
neously preventing 5.4 vascular events
among those 255 individuals (148).
Lipid-Lowering Agents and Cognitive
Function
Although concerns regarding a potential
adverse impact of lipid-lowering agents
on cognitive function have been raised,
several lines of evidence point against
this association, as detailed in a 2018
European Atherosclerosis Society Con-
sensus Panel statement (150). First,
there are three large randomized trials
of statin versus placebo where speciﬁc
cognitive tests were performed, and no
differences were seen between statin
and placebo (151–154). In addition, no
change in cognitive function has been
reported in studies with the addition
of ezetimibe (112) or PCSK9 inhibitors
(115,155) to statin therapy, including
among individuals treated to very low
LDL cholesterol levels. In addition, the
most recent systematic review of the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration’s
(FDA’s) postmarketing surveillance da-
tabases, randomized controlled trials,
and cohort, case-control, and cross-
sectional studies evaluating cognition
in individuals receiving statins found
that published data do not reveal an
adverse effect of statins on cognition
(156). Therefore, a concern that statins
or other lipid-lowering agents might
cause cognitive dysfunction or demen-
tia is not currently supported by evi-
dence and should not deter their use
in individuals with diabetes at high risk
for ASCVD (156).
ANTIPLATELET AGENTS
Recommendations
10.34 Use aspirin therapy (75–162 mg/day)
as a secondary prevention strategy
in those with diabetes and a history
of ASCVD. A
S192
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

10.35a For individuals with ASCVD
and documented aspirin allergy, clopi-
dogrel (75 mg/day) should be used. B
10.35b The length of treatment with
dual antiplatelet therapy using low-
dose aspirin and a P2Y12 inhibitor
in individuals with diabetes after an
acute coronary syndrome or acute is-
chemic stroke/transient ischemic at-
tack should be determined by an
interprofessional team approach that
includes a cardiovascular or neurologi-
cal specialist, respectively. E
10.36 Combination therapy with aspi-
rin plus low-dose rivaroxaban should
be considered for individuals with sta-
ble coronary and/or peripheral artery
disease (PAD) and low bleeding risk
to prevent major adverse limb and
cardiovascular events. A
10.37 Aspirin therapy (75–162 mg/day)
may be considered as a primary pre-
vention strategy in those with diabetes
who are at increased cardiovascular
risk, after a comprehensive discussion
with the individual on the beneﬁts ver-
sus the comparable increased risk of
bleeding. A
Risk Reduction
Aspirin has been shown to be effective
in reducing cardiovascular morbidity and
mortality in high-risk individuals with pre-
vious MI or stroke (secondary prevention)
and is strongly recommended. In primary
prevention, however, among individuals
with no previous cardiovascular events,
its net beneﬁt is more controversial
(147,157).
Previous randomized controlled trials
of aspirin, speciﬁcally in people with di-
abetes, failed to consistently show a sig-
niﬁcant reduction in overall ASCVD end
points, raising questions about the efﬁ-
cacy of aspirin for primary prevention in
people with diabetes, although some sex
differences were suggested (158–160).
The Antithrombotic Trialists’ Collabo-
ration published an individual patient–
level meta-analysis (161) of the six large
trials of aspirin for primary prevention
in the general population. These trials
collectively enrolled over 95,000 partici-
pants, including almost 4,000 with dia-
betes. Overall, they found that aspirin
reduced the risk of serious vascular
events by 12% (relative risk 0.88 [95%
CI 0.82–0.94]). The largest reduction
was for nonfatal MI, with little effect on
CHD death (relative risk 0.95 [95% CI
0.78–1.15]) or total stroke.
Most recently, the ASCEND (A Study
of Cardiovascular Events iN Diabetes)
trial randomized 15,480 people with diabe-
tes but no evident cardiovascular disease
to aspirin 100 mg daily or placebo (162).
The primary efﬁcacy end point was vascu-
lar death, MI, stroke, or transient ischemic
attack. The primary safety outcome was
major bleeding (i.e., intracranial hemor-
rhage, sight-threatening bleeding in the
eye, gastrointestinal bleeding, or other
serious bleeding). During a mean follow-
up of 7.4 years, there was a signiﬁcant
12% reduction in the primary efﬁcacy
end point (8.5% vs. 9.6%; P = 0.01). In
contrast, major bleeding was signiﬁcantly
increased from 3.2 to 4.1% in the aspirin
group (rate ratio 1.29; P = 0.003), with
most of the excess being gastrointestinal
bleeding and other extracranial bleeding.
There were no signiﬁcant differences by
sex, weight, or duration of diabetes or
other baseline factors, including ASCVD
risk score.
Two other large, randomized trials of
aspirin for primary prevention, in peo-
ple without diabetes (ARRIVE [Aspirin to
Reduce Risk of Initial Vascular Events])
(163) and in the elderly (ASPREE [Aspi-
rin in Reducing Events in the Elderly])
(164), which included 11% with diabe-
tes, found no beneﬁt of aspirin on the
primary efﬁcacy end point and an in-
creased risk of bleeding. In ARRIVE, with
12,546 individuals over a period of
60 months of follow-up, the primary end
point occurred in 4.29% vs. 4.48% of indi-
viduals in the aspirin versus placebo groups
(HR 0.96 [95% CI 0.81–1.13]; P = 0.60).
Gastrointestinal bleeding events (char-
acterized as mild) occurred in 0.97% of
individuals in the aspirin group vs.
0.46% in the placebo group (HR 2.11
[95% CI 1.36–3.28]; P = 0.0007). In
ASPREE, including 19,114 individuals, for
cardiovascular disease (fatal CHD, MI,
stroke, or hospitalization for heart failure)
after a median of 4.7 years of follow-up,
the rates per 1,000 person-years were
10.7 vs. 11.3 events in aspirin vs. placebo
groups (HR 0.95 [95% CI 0.83–1.08]). The
rate of major hemorrhage per 1,000 per-
son-years was 8.6 events vs. 6.2 events,
respectively (HR 1.38 [95% CI 1.18–1.62];
P < 0.001).
Thus, aspirin appears to have a mod-
est effect on ischemic vascular events,
with the absolute decrease in events de-
pending on the underlying ASCVD risk.
The main adverse effect is an increased
risk of gastrointestinal bleeding. The ex-
cess risk may be as high as 5 per 1,000
per year in real-world settings. However,
for adults with ASCVD risk >1% per year,
the number of ASCVD events prevented
will be similar to the number of episodes
of bleeding induced, although these com-
plications do not have equal effects on
long-term health (165).
Recommendations for using aspirin
as primary prevention include both men
and women aged $50 years with diabe-
tes and at least one additional major
risk factor (family history of premature
ASCVD, hypertension, dyslipidemia, smok-
ing, or CKD/albuminuria) who are not at
increased risk of bleeding (e.g., older age,
anemia, or renal disease) (166–169). Non-
invasive imaging techniques such as coro-
nary calcium scoring may help further
tailor aspirin therapy, particularly in those
at low risk (170,171). For people >70 years
of age (with or without diabetes), the bal-
ance appears to have greater risk than
beneﬁt (162,164). Thus, for primary pre-
vention, the use of aspirin needs to be
carefully considered and may generally not
be recommended. Aspirin may be consid-
ered in the context of high cardiovascular
risk with low bleeding risk but generally
not in older adults. Aspirin therapy for pri-
mary prevention may be considered in the
context of shared decision-making, which
carefully weighs the cardiovascular beneﬁts
with the fairly comparable increase in risk
of bleeding.
For people with documented ASCVD,
use of aspirin for secondary prevention
has far greater beneﬁt than risk; for this
indication, aspirin is still recommended
(157).
Aspirin Use in People <50 Years of Age
Aspirin is not recommended for those
at low risk of ASCVD (such as men and
women aged <50 years with diabetes
with no other major ASCVD risk factors),
as the low beneﬁt is likely to be out-
weighed by the risk of bleeding. Clinical
judgment should be used for those at inter-
mediate risk (younger individuals with one
or more risk factors or older individuals
with no risk factors) until further research is
available. Individuals’ willingness to undergo
long-term aspirin therapy should also be
considered in shared decision-making (172).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S193
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Aspirin use in individuals aged <21 years is
generally contraindicated due to the associ-
ated risk of Reye syndrome.
Aspirin Dosing
Average daily dosages used in most clini-
cal trials involving people with diabetes
ranged from 50 to 650 mg but were
mostly in the range of 100–325 mg/day.
There is little evidence to support any
speciﬁc dose, but using the lowest possi-
ble dose may help to reduce side effects
(173). In the ADAPTABLE (Aspirin Dosing:
A Patient-Centric Trial Assessing Beneﬁts
and Long-term Effectiveness) trial of indi-
viduals with established cardiovascular
disease, 38% of whom had diabetes,
there were no signiﬁcant differences in
cardiovascular events or major bleeding
between individuals assigned to 81 mg
and those assigned to 325 mg of aspirin
daily (174). In the U.S., the most com-
mon low-dose tablet is 81 mg. Although
platelets from people with diabetes have
altered function, it is unclear what, if any,
effect that ﬁnding has on the required
dose of aspirin for cardioprotective ef-
fects in people with diabetes. Many alter-
nate pathways for platelet activation
exist that are independent of thrombox-
ane A2 and thus are not sensitive to the
effects of aspirin (175). “Aspirin re-
sistance” has been described in people
with diabetes when measured by a vari-
ety of ex vivo and in vitro methods
(platelet aggregometry and measurement
of thromboxane B2) (176), but other
studies suggest no impairment in aspirin
response among people with diabetes
(177). A trial suggested that more fre-
quent dosing of aspirin may reduce plate-
let reactivity in individuals with diabetes
(178); however, these observations alone
are insufﬁcient to empirically recommend
that higher doses of aspirin be used in
this group at this time. Another meta-
analysis raised the hypothesis that low-
dose aspirin efﬁcacy is reduced in those
weighing >70 kg (179); however, the
ASCEND trial found beneﬁt of low-dose
aspirin in those in this weight range,
which would thus not validate this sug-
gested hypothesis (162). It appears that
75–162 mg/day is optimal.
Indications for P2Y12 Receptor
Antagonist Use
Combination dual antiplatelet therapy
with aspirin and a P2Y12 receptor antag-
onist is indicated after acute coronary
syndromes and coronary revasculariza-
tion with stenting (180). In addition, cur-
rent guidelines recommend short-term
dual antiplatelet therapy after high-risk
transient ischemic attack and minor
stroke (181). The indications for dual anti-
platelet therapy and length of treatment
are rapidly evolving and should be deter-
mined by an interprofessional team ap-
proach that includes a cardiovascular or
neurological specialist, respectively. Evi-
dence supports use of either ticagrelor or
clopidogrel if no percutaneous coronary
intervention was performed and clopidog-
rel, ticagrelor, or prasugrel if a percutane-
ous coronary intervention was performed
(182). In people with diabetes and prior
MI (1–3 years before), adding ticagrelor
to aspirin signiﬁcantly reduces the risk of
recurrent ischemic events, including car-
diovascular and CHD death (183). Simi-
larly, the addition of ticagrelor to aspirin
reduced the risk of ischemic cardiovascu-
lar events compared with aspirin alone
in people with diabetes and stable coro-
nary artery disease (184,185). However,
a higher incidence of major bleeding,
including intracranial hemorrhage, was
noted with dual antiplatelet therapy. The
net clinical beneﬁt (ischemic beneﬁt vs.
bleeding risk) was improved with ticagre-
lor therapy in the large prespeciﬁed
subgroup of individuals with history of
percutaneous coronary intervention, while
no net beneﬁt was seen in individuals
without prior percutaneous coronary in-
tervention (185). However, early aspirin
discontinuation compared with continued
dual antiplatelet therapy after coronary
stenting may reduce the risk of bleeding
without a corresponding increase in the
risks of mortality and ischemic events, as
shown in a prespeciﬁed analysis of people
with diabetes enrolled in the TWILIGHT
(Ticagrelor With Aspirin or Alone in High-
Risk Patients After Coronary Intervention)
trial and a recent meta-analysis (186,187).
Combination Antiplatelet and
Anticoagulation Therapy
Combination therapy with aspirin plus
low-dose rivaroxaban may be consid-
ered for people with stable coronary
and/or PAD to prevent major adverse
limb and cardiovascular complications.
In the COMPASS (Cardiovascular Out-
comes for People Using Anticoagulation
Strategies) trial of 27,395 individuals
with established coronary artery disease
and/or PAD, aspirin plus rivaroxaban
2.5 mg twice daily was superior to aspi-
rin plus placebo in the reduction of car-
diovascular ischemic events, including
major adverse limb events. The absolute
beneﬁts of combination therapy ap-
peared larger in people with diabetes,
who comprised 10,341 of the trial par-
ticipants (188,189). A similar treatment
strategy was evaluated in the Vascular
Outcomes Study of ASA (acetylsalicylic
acid) Along with Rivaroxaban in Endovas-
cular or Surgical Limb Revascularization
for Peripheral Artery Disease (VOYAGER
PAD) trial (190), in which 6,564 individu-
als with PAD who had undergone revas-
cularization were randomly assigned to
receive rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily
plus aspirin or placebo plus aspirin. Ri-
varoxaban treatment in this group of
individuals was also associated with a
signiﬁcantly lower incidence of ischemic
cardiovascular events, including major
adverse limb events. However, an in-
creased risk of major bleeding was noted
with rivaroxaban added to aspirin treat-
ment in both COMPASS and VOYAGER
PAD.
The risks and beneﬁts of dual antipla-
telet or antiplatelet plus anticoagulant
treatment strategies should be thor-
oughly discussed with eligible individu-
als, and shared decision-making should
be used to determine an individually ap-
propriate treatment approach. This ﬁeld
of cardiovascular risk reduction is evolv-
ing rapidly, as are the deﬁnitions of op-
timal care for individuals with differing
types and circumstances of cardiovascu-
lar complications.
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
Screening
Recommendations
10.38a In asymptomatic individuals,
routine screening for coronary artery
disease is not recommended, as it
does not improve outcomes as long
as ASCVD risk factors are treated. A
10.38b Consider investigations for
coronary artery disease in the pres-
ence of any of the following: atypical
cardiac symptoms; signs or symp-
toms of associated vascular disease,
including carotid bruits, transient is-
chemic attack, stroke, claudication,
or PAD; or electrocardiogram abnor-
malities (e.g., Q waves). E
10.39a Adults with diabetes are at
increased risk for the development
S194
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

of asymptomatic cardiac structural
or functional abnormalities (stage B
heart failure) or symptomatic (stage C)
heart failure. Consider screening adults
with diabetes by measuring a natri-
uretic peptide (B-type natriuretic pep-
tide [BNP] or N-terminal pro-BNP [NT-
proBNP]) to facilitate prevention of
stage C heart failure. B
10.39b In asymptomatic individuals
with diabetes and abnormal natriuretic
peptide levels, echocardiography is
recommended to identify stage B
heart failure. A
10.40
In
asymptomatic
individuals
with diabetes and age $50 years, mi-
crovascular disease in any location, or
foot complications or any end-organ
damage from diabetes, screening for
PAD with ankle-brachial index testing
is recommended to guide treatment
for cardiovascular disease prevention
and limb preservation. A In individu-
als with diabetes duration $10 years,
screening for PAD should be consid-
ered. B
Treatment
Recommendations
10.41 Among people with type 2 di-
abetes who have established ASCVD
or established
kidney
disease,
a
sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2)
inhibitor or glucagon-like peptide 1
(GLP-1) receptor agonist with dem-
onstrated
cardiovascular
disease
beneﬁt (Table 10.3B and Table
10.3C) is recommended as part of
the comprehensive cardiovascular
risk reduction and/or glucose-lowering
treatment plans. A
10.41a In people with type 2 diabe-
tes and established ASCVD, multiple
ASCVD risk factors, or diabetic kid-
ney disease, an SGLT2 inhibitor with
demonstrated cardiovascular bene-
ﬁt is recommended to reduce the
risk of major adverse cardiovascular
events and/or heart failure hospital-
ization. A
10.41b In people with type 2 diabetes
and established ASCVD or multiple
risk factors for ASCVD, a GLP-1 recep-
tor agonist with demonstrated cardio-
vascular beneﬁt is recommended to
reduce the risk of major adverse car-
diovascular events. A
10.41c In people with type 2 diabetes
and established ASCVD or multiple
risk factors for ASCVD, combined
therapy with an SGLT2 inhibitor with
demonstrated cardiovascular beneﬁt
and a GLP-1 receptor agonist with
demonstrated cardiovascular beneﬁt
may be considered for additive re-
duction of the risk of adverse cardio-
vascular and kidney events. A
10.42a In people with type 2 diabe-
tes and established heart failure
with either preserved or reduced
ejection fraction, an SGLT2 inhibitor
(including SGLT1/2 inhibitor) with
proven beneﬁt in this patient popu-
lation is recommended to reduce
the risk of worsening heart failure
and cardiovascular death. A
10.42b In people with type 2 diabe-
tes and established heart failure
with either preserved or reduced
ejection fraction, an SGLT2 inhibitor
with proven beneﬁt in this patient
population is recommended to im-
prove symptoms, physical limitations,
and quality of life. A
10.43 For individuals with type 2 di-
abetes and chronic kidney disease
with albuminuria treated with maxi-
mum tolerated doses of ACE inhibitor
or ARB, addition of ﬁnerenone is rec-
ommended to improve cardiovascular
outcomes and reduce the risk of
chronic kidney disease progression. A
10.44 In individuals with diabetes
with established ASCVD or aged
$55 years with additional cardio-
vascular risk factors, ACE inhibitor
or ARB therapy is recommended to
reduce the risk of cardiovascular
events and mortality. A
10.45a In individuals with diabetes
and asymptomatic stage B heart failure,
an interprofessional approach to opti-
mize guideline-directed medical therapy,
which should include a cardiovascular
disease specialist, is recommended to
reduce the risk for progression to symp-
tomatic (stage C) heart failure. A
10.45b In individuals with diabetes
and asymptomatic stage B heart failure,
ACE inhibitors/ARBs and b-blockers are
recommended to reduce the risk for
progression to symptomatic (stage C)
heart failure. A
10.45c In individuals with type 2 di-
abetes and asymptomatic stage B
heart failure or with high risk of or
established cardiovascular disease,
treatment with an SGLT inhibitor (in-
cluding SGLT2 or SGLT1/2 inhibitors)
is recommended to reduce the risk of
hospitalization for heart failure. A
10.45d In individuals with type 2 di-
abetes and diabetic kidney disease, ﬁ-
nerenone is recommended to reduce
the risk of hospitalization for heart
failure. A
10.45e In individuals with diabetes,
guideline-directed medical therapy for
myocardial infarction and symptomatic
stage C heart failure is recommended
with ACE inhibitors/ARBs, MRAs, an-
giotensin receptor/neprilysin inhibitor,
b-blockers, and SGLT2 inhibitors, simi-
lar to guideline-directed medical ther-
apy for people without diabetes. A
10.46 In people with type 2 diabe-
tes with stable heart failure, metfor-
min may be continued for glucose
lowering if estimated glomerular ﬁl-
tration rate remains >30 mL/min/
1.73 m2 but should be avoided in un-
stable or hospitalized individuals with
heart failure. B
10.47 Individuals with type 1 diabe-
tes and those with type 2 diabetes
who are ketosis prone and/or those
consuming ketogenic diets who are
treated with SGLT inhibition should
be educated on the risks and signs
of ketoacidosis and methods of risk
management and provided with
appropriate tools for accurate ke-
tone
measurement
(i.e.,
serum
b-hydroxybutyrate). E
Cardiac Testing
Candidates for advanced or invasive car-
diac testing include those with 1) typical
or atypical cardiac symptoms and 2)
an abnormal resting electrocardiogram
(ECG). Exercise ECG testing without or
with echocardiography may be used as
the initial test. In adults with diabetes
$40 years of age, measurement of cor-
onary artery calcium is also reasonable
for cardiovascular risk assessment. Phar-
macologic stress echocardiography or
nuclear imaging should be considered in
individuals with diabetes in whom rest-
ing ECG abnormalities preclude exercise
stress testing (e.g., left bundle branch
block or ST-T abnormalities). In addition,
individuals who require stress testing
and
are
unable
to exercise should
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S195
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Table 10.3A—Cardiovascular and cardiorenal outcomes trials of available antihyperglycemic medications completed after
the issuance of the FDA 2008 guidelines: DPP-4 inhibitors
SAVOR-TIMI 53 (289)
(n = 16,492)
EXAMINE (311)
(n = 5,380)
TECOS (291)
(n = 14,671)
CARMELINA (292,312)
(n = 6,979)
CAROLINA (246)
(n = 6,042)
Intervention
Saxagliptin/placebo
Alogliptin/placebo
Sitagliptin/placebo
Linagliptin/placebo
Linagliptin/glimepiride
Main inclusion
criteria
Type 2 diabetes and
history of or
multiple risk
factors for CVD
Type 2 diabetes and
ACS within 15–90
days before
randomization
Type 2 diabetes and
preexisting CVD
Type 2 diabetes and
high CV and renal
risk
Type 2 diabetes and
high CV risk
A1C inclusion
criteria (%)
$6.5
6.5–11.0
6.5–8.0
6.5–10.0
6.5–8.5
Age (years)*
65.1
61.0
65.4
65.8
64.0
Race (% White)
75.2
72.7
67.9
80.2
73.0
Sex (% male)
66.9
67.9
70.7
62.9
60.0
Diabetes duration
(years)*
10.3
7.1
11.6
14.7
6.2
Median follow-up
(years)
2.1
1.5
3.0
2.2
6.3
Statin use (%)
78
91
80
71.8
64.1
Metformin use (%)
70
66
82
54.8
82.5
Prior CVD/CHF (%)
78/13
100/28
74/18
57/26.8
34.5/4.5
Mean baseline
A1C (%)
8.0
8.0
7.2
7.9
7.2
Mean difference in
A1C between
groups at end of
treatment (%)
0.3†
0.3†
0.3†
0.36†
0
Year started/
reported
2010/2013
2009/2013
2008/2015
2013/2018
2010/2019
Primary outcome‡
3-point MACE 1.00
(0.89–1.12)
3-point MACE 0.96
(95% UL #1.16)
4-point MACE 0.98
(0.89–1.08)
3-point MACE 1.02
(0.89–1.17)
3-point MACE 0.98
(0.84–1.14)
Key secondary
outcome‡
Expanded MACE 1.02
(0.94–1.11)
4-point MACE 0.95
(95% UL #1.14)
3-point MACE 0.99
(0.89–1.10)
Kidney composite
(ESRD, sustained
$40% decrease in
eGFR, or renal
death) 1.04
(0.89–1.22)
4-point MACE 0.99
(0.86–1.14)
Cardiovascular
death‡
1.03 (0.87–1.22)
0.85 (0.66–1.10)
1.03 (0.89–1.19)
0.96 (0.81–1.14)
1.00 (0.81–1.24)
MI‡
0.95 (0.80–1.12)
1.08 (0.88–1.33)
0.95 (0.81–1.11)
1.12 (0.90–1.40)
1.03 (0.82–1.29)
Stroke‡
1.11 (0.88–1.39)
0.91 (0.55–1.50)
0.97 (0.79–1.19)
0.91 (0.67–1.23)
0.86 (0.66–1.12)
HF hospitalization‡
1.27 (1.07–1.51)
1.19 (0.90–1.58)
1.00 (0.83–1.20)
0.90 (0.74–1.08)
1.21 (0.92–1.59)
Unstable angina
hospitalization‡
1.19 (0.89–1.60)
0.90 (0.60–1.37)
0.90 (0.70–1.16)
0.87 (0.57–1.31)
1.07 (0.74–1.54)
All-cause mortality‡
1.11 (0.96–1.27)
0.88 (0.71–1.09)
1.01 (0.90–1.14)
0.98 (0.84–1.13)
0.91 (0.78–1.06)
Worsening
nephropathy‡§
1.08 (0.88–1.32)
—
—
Kidney composite
(see above)
—
—, not assessed/reported; ACS, acute coronary syndrome; CHF, congestive heart failure; CV, cardiovascular; CVD, cardiovascular disease;
DPP-4, dipeptidyl peptidase 4; eGFR, estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate; ESRD, end-stage renal disease; GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide 1; HF,
heart failure; MACE, major adverse cardiovascular event; MI, myocardial infarction; UL, upper limit. Data in this table were adapted from
Cefalu et al. (313). *Age was reported as means in all trials except EXAMINE, which reported medians; diabetes duration was reported as
means in all trials except SAVOR-TIMI 53 and EXAMINE, which reported medians. †Signiﬁcant difference in A1C between groups (P < 0.05).
‡Outcomes reported as hazard ratio (95% CI). §Worsening nephropathy is deﬁned as a doubling of creatinine level, initiation of dialysis, renal
transplantation, or creatinine >6.0 mg/dL (>530 mmol/L) in SAVOR-TIMI 53. Worsening nephropathy was a prespeciﬁed exploratory adjudi-
cated outcome in SAVOR-TIMI 53.
S196
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

undergo pharmacologic stress echocar-
diography or nuclear imaging.
Screening Asymptomatic Individuals
for Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular
Disease
The screening of asymptomatic individu-
als with high ASCVD risk is not recom-
mended (191), in part because these
high-risk people should already be re-
ceiving intensive medical therapy—an
approach that provides beneﬁts similar
to those of invasive revascularization
(192,193). There is also some evidence
that silent ischemia may reverse over
time, adding to the controversy con-
cerning aggressive screening strategies
(194). In prospective studies, coronary
artery calcium has been established as
an independent predictor of future
ASCVD events in people with diabetes
and is consistently superior to both the
UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS)
risk engine and the Framingham Risk
Score in predicting risk in this population
(195–197). However, a randomized ob-
servational trial demonstrated no clinical
beneﬁt to routine screening of asymp-
tomatic people with type 2 diabetes and
normal ECGs (198). Despite abnormal
myocardial perfusion imaging in more
than one in ﬁve individuals, cardiac out-
comes were essentially equal (and very
low) in screened versus unscreened indi-
viduals. Accordingly, indiscriminate screen-
ing is not considered cost-effective. Studies
have found that a risk factor–based ap-
proach to the initial diagnostic evaluation
and subsequent follow-up for coronary
artery disease fails to identify which peo-
ple with type 2 diabetes will have silent
ischemia on screening tests (199,200).
Any beneﬁt of newer noninvasive coro-
nary artery disease screening methods,
such as computed tomography calcium
scoring and computed tomography angi-
ography, to identify patient subgroups for
different treatment strategies remains un-
proven in asymptomatic people with dia-
betes, though research is ongoing. Since
asymptomatic people with diabetes with
higher coronary disease burden have more
future cardiac events (195,201,202), these
additional imaging tests may provide rea-
soning for treatment intensiﬁcation and/or
guide informed individual decision-making
and willingness for medication initiation
and participation.
While coronary artery screening meth-
ods, such as calcium scoring, may improve
cardiovascular risk assessment in people
with type 2 diabetes (203), their routine
use leads to radiation exposure and may
result in unnecessary invasive testing,
such as coronary angiography and revas-
cularization procedures. The ultimate bal-
ance of beneﬁt, cost, and risk of such an
approach in asymptomatic individuals re-
mains controversial, particularly in the
modern setting of aggressive ASCVD risk
factor control.
Screening for Asymptomatic Heart
Failure in People With Diabetes
People with diabetes are at an increased
risk for developing heart failure, as shown
in multiple longitudinal, observational stud-
ies (9,204–206).This association is not only
observed in people with type 2 diabetes
but also evident in people with type 1 dia-
betes (9,207,208). In a large multinational
cohort of 750,000 people with diabetes
without established cardiovascular disease,
heart failure and CKD were the most fre-
quent ﬁrst cardiovascular disease manifes-
tations (209). For a detailed review of
screening, diagnosis, and treatment recom-
mendations of heart failure in people with
diabetes, the reader is further referred to
the ADA consensus report “Heart Failure:
An Underappreciated Complication of Dia-
betes. A Consensus Report of the American
Diabetes Association” (7).
The increased risk for heart failure in
people with diabetes is classiﬁed as the
presence of stage A heart failure, i.e.,
an increased risk for heart failure but
without symptoms, structural heart dis-
ease, or biomarker evidence of myocar-
dial strain (210). Similar to those with
stage A heart failure, people with stage B
heart failure are asymptomatic but have
evidence of structural heart disease or
functional cardiac abnormalities, including
elevated biomarkers of myocardial strain
or increased ﬁlling pressures. During
these asymptomatic stages of heart
failure, people with diabetes are at par-
ticularly high risk for progression to
symptomatic stage C and D heart fail-
ure (211,212).
Identiﬁcation, risk stratiﬁcation, and
early treatment of risk factors in people
with diabetes and asymptomatic stages of
heart failure reduce the risk for progres-
sion to symptomatic heart failure (213,
214). In people with type 2 diabetes, mea-
surement of natriuretic peptides, includ-
ing B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) or
N-terminal pro-BNP (NT-proBNP), identiﬁes
people at risk for heart failure develop-
ment, progression of symptoms, and heart
failure–related mortality. For example, in
the Canagliﬂozin Cardiovascular Assess-
ment Study (CANVAS), a baseline NT-
proBNP level $125 pg/mL predicted heart
failure hospitalization and all-cause mor-
tality (215). In the Examination of Cardio-
vascular Outcomes with Alogliptin versus
Standard of Care (EXAMINE) trial, in-
creased baseline NT-proBNP levels or an
increase after a repeated measurement
at 6 months was associated with an in-
creased risk for symptomatic heart failure
(216). In a combined analysis of three co-
horts without disease (Atherosclerosis Risk
In Communities [ARIC], Dallas Heart Study,
and Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis
[MESA]), including 33% of participants
with diabetes and 66% with prediabetes,
biomarker screening stratiﬁes people at
high risk for incident heart failure (217). A
similar association and prognostic values
of increased NT-proBNP with increased
cardiovascular and all-cause mortality has
been reported in people with type 1 diabe-
tes (218).
Results from several randomized con-
trolled trials revealed that more inten-
sive treatment of risk factors in people
with increased levels of natriuretic pep-
tides reduces the risk for symptomatic
heart failure, heart failure hospitaliza-
tion, and newly diagnosed left ventricu-
lar dysfunction. The NT-proBNP Guided
Primary Prevention of CV Events in Dia-
betic Patients (PONTIAC) trial enrolled
300 people with type 2 diabetes and el-
evated NT-proBNP levels to usual diabe-
tes care versus usual diabetes care plus
intensiﬁed risk factor treatment in cardiac
outpatient clinics (214). After 12 months,
there was signiﬁcant increased use of
renin-angiotensin system antagonists and
b-blockers in the intensive treatment
group but no difference in blood pres-
sure. The primary outcome of hospitaliza-
tion or death due to cardiac disease was
signiﬁcantly reduced in the intensive treat-
ment group (HR 0.35 [95% CI 0.13–0.98]; P
= 0.044). The St Vincent’s Screening to
Prevent Heart Failure Study (STOP-HF)
was a randomized controlled trial that
enrolled 1,374 participants with cardio-
vascular risk factors to receive either
usual primary care or screening with BNP
testing. Participants with an elevated
BNP level of 50 pg/mL or higher under-
went echocardiography followed by col-
laborative care between primary care
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S197
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Table 10.3B—Cardiovascular and cardiorenal outcomes trials of available antihyperglycemic medications completed after the issuance of the FDA 2008 guidelines: GLP-1
receptor agonists
ELIXA (260)
(n = 6,068)
LEADER (255)
(n = 9,340)
SUSTAIN-6 (256)*
(n = 3,297)
EXSCEL (261)
(n = 14,752)
REWIND (259)
(n = 9,901)
PIONEER-6 (257)
(n = 3,183)
Intervention
Lixisenatide/placebo
Liraglutide/placebo
Semaglutide s.c.
injection/placebo
Exenatide QW/
placebo
Dulaglutide/placebo
Semaglutide oral/placebo
Main inclusion criteria
Type 2 diabetes and
history of ACS
(<180 days)
Type 2 diabetes and
preexisting CVD,
CKD, or HF at
$50 years of age
or CV risk at $60
years of age
Type 2 diabetes and
preexisting CVD,
HF, or CKD at
$50 years of age
or CV risk at $60
years of age
Type 2 diabetes
with or without
preexisting CVD
Type 2 diabetes and
prior ASCVD
event or risk
factors for ASCVD
Type 2 diabetes and high
CV risk (age of $50
years with established
CVD or CKD, or age of
$60 years with CV
risk factors only)
A1C inclusion criteria (%)
5.5–11.0
$7.0
$7.0
6.5–10.0
#9.5
None
Age (years)†
60.3
64.3
64.6
62
66.2
66
Race (% White)
75.2
77.5
83.0
75.8
75.7
72.3
Sex (% male)
69.3
64.3
60.7
62
53.7
68.4
Diabetes duration (years)†
9.3
12.8
13.9
12
10.5
14.9
Median follow-up (years)
2.1
3.8
2.1
3.2
5.4
1.3
Statin use (%)
93
72
73
74
66
85.2 (all lipid-lowering)
Metformin use (%)
66
76
73
77
81
77.4
Prior CVD/CHF (%)
100/22
81/18
60/24
73.1/16.2
32/9
84.7/12.2
Mean baseline A1C (%)
7.7
8.7
8.7
8.0
7.4
8.2
Mean difference in A1C
between groups at end of
treatment (%)
0.3‡^
0.4‡
0.7 or 1.0^
0.53‡^
0.61‡
0.7
Year started/reported
2010/2015
2010/2016
2013/2016
2010/2017
2011/2019
2017/2019
Primary outcome§
4-point MACE
1.02 (0.89–1.17)
3-point MACE
0.87 (0.78–0.97)
3-point MACE
0.74 (0.58–0.95)
3-point MACE
0.91 (0.83–1.00)
3-point MACE
0.88 (0.79–0.99)
3-point MACE
0.79 (0.57–1.11)
Continued on p. S199
S198
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

physicians and cardiovascular specialist
services. Participants in the intervention
group received more renin-angiotensin/
aldosterone system–based therapy. The
primary end point of left ventricular dys-
function and heart failure was signiﬁ-
cantly reduced in the intervention group
(odds ratio 0.55 [95% CI 0.37–0.82];
P=0.003). The risk for left ventricular sys-
tolic dysfunction, diastolic dysfunction, or
heart failure was signiﬁcantly reduced in
the BNP-guided intervention group. Ap-
proximately 18% of people in the control
and intervention groups had a diagnosis
of diabetes. Finally, in the original Intensi-
ﬁed Multifactorial Intervention in Pa-
tients
With
Type
2
Diabetes
and
Microalbuminuria (Steno-2) trial, 160 in-
dividuals with type 2 diabetes and mi-
croalbuminuria were enrolled, and the
trial examined the effect of multifacto-
rial treatment on cardiovascular out-
comes (219). When stratiﬁed in a later
analysis by NT-proBNP levels, plasma
NT-proBNP levels above the median
were associated with increased risk of
cardiovascular disease, and a decrease in
plasma NT-proBNP of 10 pg/mL for the
ﬁrst 2 years of intervention was associated
with a 1% relative risk reduction in the
primary cardiovascular end point (220).
Based on this collective evidence, the
committee recommends considering screen-
ing asymptomatic adults with diabetes for
the development of cardiac structural or
functional abnormalities (stage B heart
failure) by measurement of natriuretic
peptides, including BNP or NT-proBNP
levels. The biomarker threshold for ab-
normal values is a BNP level $50 pg/mL
and NT-proBNP $125 pg/mL. Abnormal
levels of natriuretic peptide will need to
be evaluated in the context of each indi-
vidual, using clinical judgment, and in the
absence of any possible competing diag-
noses, particularly recognizing conditions
that may lead to increased levels of
natriuretic peptide, including renal in-
sufﬁciency, pulmonary disease including
pulmonary hypertension and chronic ob-
structive lung disease, obstructive sleep
apnea, ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke,
and anemia. Conversely, natriuretic pep-
tide levels may be decreased in the
population with obesity, which impairs
sensitivity of testing.
Risk stratiﬁcation for incident heart fail-
ure (stage A) and identiﬁcation of people
with asymptomatic cardiac abnormalities
(stage B) may prevent progression to
Table 10.3B—Continued
ELIXA (260)
(n = 6,068)
LEADER (255)
(n = 9,340)
SUSTAIN-6 (256)*
(n = 3,297)
EXSCEL (261)
(n = 14,752)
REWIND (259)
(n = 9,901)
PIONEER-6 (257)
(n = 3,183)
Key secondary outcome§
Expanded MACE
1.02 (0.90–1.11)
Expanded MACE
0.88 (0.81–0.96)
Expanded MACE
0.74 (0.62–0.89)
Individual
components of
MACE (see
below)
Composite
microvascular
outcome (eye or
renal outcome)
0.87 (0.79–0.95)
Expanded MACE or HF
hospitalization
0.82 (0.61–1.10)
Cardiovascular death§
0.98 (0.78–1.22)
0.78 (0.66–0.93)
0.98 (0.65–1.48)
0.88 (0.76–1.02)
0.91 (0.78–1.06)
0.49 (0.27–0.92)
MI§
1.03 (0.87–1.22)
0.86 (0.73–1.00)
0.74 (0.51–1.08)
0.97 (0.85–1.10)
0.96 (0.79–1.15)
1.18 (0.73–1.90)
Stroke§
1.12 (0.79–1.58)
0.86 (0.71–1.06)
0.61 (0.38–0.99)
0.85 (0.70–1.03)
0.76 (0.61–0.95)
0.74 (0.35–1.57)
HF hospitalization§
0.96 (0.75–1.23)
0.87 (0.73–1.05)
1.11 (0.77–1.61)
0.94 (0.78–1.13)
0.93 (0.77–1.12)
0.86 (0.48–1.55)
Unstable angina
hospitalization§
1.11 (0.47–2.62)
0.98 (0.76–1.26)
0.82 (0.47–1.44)
1.05 (0.94–1.18)
1.14 (0.84–1.54)
1.56 (0.60–4.01)
All-cause mortality§
0.94 (0.78–1.13)
0.85 (0.74–0.97)
1.05 (0.74–1.50)
0.86 (0.77–0.97)
0.90 (0.80–1.01)
0.51 (0.31–0.84)
Worsening nephropathy§jj
—
0.78 (0.67–0.92)
0.64 (0.46–0.88)
—
0.85 (0.77–0.93)
—
—, not assessed/reported; ACS, acute coronary syndrome; ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; CHF, congestive heart failure; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CV, cardiovascular; CVD, cardiovascular disease;
GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide 1; HF, heart failure; MACE, major adverse cardiovascular event; MI, myocardial infarction. Data in this table were adapted from Cefalu et al. (313). *Powered to rule out a hazard ra-
tio of 1.8; superiority hypothesis not prespeciﬁed. †Age was reported as means in all trials; diabetes duration was reported as means in all trials except EXSCEL, which reported medians. ‡Signiﬁcant
difference in A1C between groups (P < 0.05). ^A1C change of 0.66% with 0.5 mg and 1.05% with 1-mg dose of semaglutide. §Outcomes reported as hazard ratio (95% Cl). jjWorsening nephropathy is
deﬁned as the new onset of urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio >300 mg/g creatinine or a doubling of the serum creatinine level and an estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate of <45 mL/min/1.73 m2, the
need for continuous renal replacement therapy, or death from renal disease in LEADER and SUSTAIN-6 and as new macroalbuminuria, a sustained decline in estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate of 30%
or more from baseline, or chronic renal replacement therapy in REWIND. Worsening nephropathy was a prespeciﬁed exploratory adjudicated outcome in LEADER, SUSTAIN-6, and REWIND.
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S199
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Table 10.3C—Cardiovascular and cardiorenal outcomes trials of available antihyperglycemic medications completed after the issuance of the FDA 2008 guidelines: SGLT2
inhibitors
EMPA-REG
OUTCOME (11)
(n = 7,020)
CANVAS
Program (12)
(n = 10,142)
DECLARE-TIMI 58
(249)
(n = 17,160)
CREDENCE (247)
(n = 4,401)
DAPA-CKD (250,314)
(n = 4,304; 2,906
with diabetes)
VERTIS CV (254,315)
(n = 8,246)
DAPA-HF (14)
(n = 4,744; 1,983
with diabetes)
EMPEROR-Reduced
(253)
(n = 3,730; 1,856
with diabetes)
EMPEROR-Preserved
(242,316)
(n = 5,988; 2,938 with
diabetes)
DELIVER (252)
(n = 6,263; 2,807
with diabetes)
Intervention
Empagliﬂozin/placebo
Canagliﬂozin/placebo
Dapagliﬂozin/placebo
Canagliﬂozin/placebo
Dapagliﬂozin/placebo
Ertugliﬂozin/placebo
Dapagliﬂozin/placebo
Empagliﬂozin/placebo* Empagliﬂozin/placebo
Dapagliﬂozin/placebo
Main inclusion criteria Type 2 diabetes and
preexisting CVD
Type 2 diabetes and
preexisting CVD at
$30 years of age
or $2 CV risk
factors at $50
years of age
Type 2 diabetes and
established ASCVD
or multiple risk
factors for ASCVD
Type 2 diabetes and
albuminuric
kidney disease
Albuminuric kidney
disease, with or
without diabetes
Type 2 diabetes and
ASCVD
NYHA class II, III, or
IV heart failure
and an ejection
fraction #40%,
with or without
diabetes
NYHA class II, III, or
IV heart failure
and an ejection
fraction #40%,
with or without
diabetes
NYHA class II, III, or IV
heart failure and an
ejection fraction
>40%
NYHA class II, III, or
IV heart failure
and an ejection
fraction >40%
with or without
diabetes
A1C inclusion criteria
(%)
7.0–10.0
7.0–10.5
$6.5
6.5–12
—
7.0–10.5
—
—
—
—
Age (years)†
63.1
63.3
64.0
63
61.8
64.4
66
67.2, 66.5
71.8, 71.9
71.7
Race (% White)
72.4
78.3
79.6
66.6
53.2
87.8
70.3
71.1, 69.8
76.3, 75.4
71.2
Sex (% male)
71.5
64.2
62.6
66.1
66.9
70
76.6
76.5, 75.6
55.4, 55.3
56.1
Diabetes duration
(years)†
57% >10
13.5
11.0
15.8
—
12.9
—
—
—
—
Median follow-up
(years)
3.1
3.6
4.2
2.6
2.4
3.5
1.5
1.3
2.2
2.3
Statin use (%)
77
75
75 (statin or
ezetimibe use)
69
64.9
—
—
—
68.1, 68.8
—
Metformin use (%)
74
77
82
57.8
29
—
51.2% (of people
with diabetes)
—
—
—
Prior CVD/CHF (%)
99/10
65.6/14.4
40/10
50.4/14.8
37.4/10.9
99.9/23.1
100% with CHF
100% with CHF
100% with CHF
100% with CHF
Mean baseline
A1C (%)
8.1
8.2
8.3
8.3
7.1% (7.8% in those
with diabetes)
8.2
—
—
—
6.6
Mean difference in
A1C between
groups at end of
treatment (%)
0.3^
0.58‡
0.43‡
0.31
—
0.48 to 0.5
—
—
—
—
Year started/reported
2010/2015
2009/2017
2013/2018
2017/2019
2017/2020
2013/2020
2017/2019
2017/2020
2017/2020
2018/2022
Continued on p. S201
S200
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Table 10.3C—Continued
EMPA-REG
OUTCOME (11)
(n = 7,020)
CANVAS
Program (12)
(n = 10,142)
DECLARE-TIMI 58
(249)
(n = 17,160)
CREDENCE (247)
(n = 4,401)
DAPA-CKD (250,314)
(n = 4,304; 2,906
with diabetes)
VERTIS CV (254,315)
(n = 8,246)
DAPA-HF (14)
(n = 4,744; 1,983
with diabetes)
EMPEROR-Reduced
(253)
(n = 3,730; 1,856
with diabetes)
EMPEROR-Preserved
(242,316)
(n = 5,988; 2,938 with
diabetes)
DELIVER (252)
(n = 6,263; 2,807
with diabetes)
Primary outcome§
3-point MACE
0.86 (0.74–0.99)
3-point MACE
0.86 (0.75–0.97)
3-point MACE
0.93 (0.84–1.03)
CV death or HF
hospitalization
0.83 (0.73–0.95)
ESRD, doubling of
creatinine, or
death from renal
or CV cause
0.70 (0.59–0.82)
$50% decline in
eGFR, ESKD, or
death from renal
or CV cause
0.61 (0.51–0.72)
3-point MACE
0.97 (0.85–1.11)
Worsening heart
failure or death
from CV causes
0.74 (0.65–0.85)
Results did not differ
by diabetes status
CV death or HF
hospitalization
0.75 (0.65–0.86)
CV death or HF
hospitalization
0.79 (0.69–0.90)
Worsening HF or CV
death
0.82 (0.73–0.92)
Key secondary
outcome§
4-point MACE
0.89 (0.78–1.01)
All-cause and CV
mortality (see
below)
Death from any
cause 0.93
(0.82–1.04)
Renal composite
($40% decrease
in eGFR rate to
<60 mL/min/
1.73 m2, new
ESRD, or death
from renal or CV
causes
0.76 (0.67–0.87)
CV death or HF
hospitalization
0.69 (0.57–0.83)
3-point MACE 0.80
(0.67–0.95)
$50% decline in
eGFR, ESKD, or
death from
renal cause
0.56 (0.45–0.68)
CV death or HF
hospitalization
0.71 (0.55–0.92)
Death from
any cause
0.69 (0.53–0.88)
CV death or HF
hospitalization
0.88 (0.75–1.03)
CV death
0.92 (0.77–1.11)
Renal death, renal
replacement
therapy, or
doubling of
creatinine
0.81 (0.63–1.04)
CV death or HF
hospitalization
0.75 (0.65–0.85)
Total HF
hospitalizations
0.70 (0.58–0.85)
Mean slope of
change in eGFR
1.73 (1.10–2.37)
All HF hospitalizations
(ﬁrst and recurrent)
0.73 (0.61–0.88)
Rate of decline in eGFR
(1.25 vs. 2.62
mL/min/1.73 m2;
P < 0.001)
Total number
worsening HF
and CV deaths
0.77 (0.67–0.89)
Change in KCCQ TSS
at month 8 1.11
(1.03–1.21)
Mean change in
KCCQ TSS
2.4 (1.5–3.4)
All-cause mortality
0.94 (0.83–1.07)
Cardiovascular death§ 0.62 (0.49–0.77)
0.87 (0.72–1.06)
0.98 (0.82–1.17)
0.78 (0.61–1.00)
0.81 (0.58–1.12)
0.92 (0.77–1.11)
0.82 (0.69–0.98)
0.92 (0.75–1.12)
0.91 (0.76–1.09)
0.88 (0.74–1.05)
MI§
0.87 (0.70–1.09)
0.89 (0.73–1.09)
0.89 (0.77–1.01)
—
—
1.04 (0.86–1.26)
—
—
—
—
Stroke§
1.18 (0.89–1.56)
0.87 (0.69–1.09)
1.01 (0.84–1.21)
—
—
1.06 (0.82–1.37)
—
—
—
—
HF hospitalization§
0.65 (0.50–0.85)
0.67 (0.52–0.87)
0.73 (0.61–0.88)
0.61 (0.47–0.80)
—
0.70 (0.54–0.90)
0.70 (0.59–0.83)
0.69 (0.59–0.81)
0.73 (0.61–0.88)
0.77 (0.67–0.89)
Unstable angina
hospitalization§
0.99 (0.74–1.34)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
All-cause mortality§
0.68 (0.57–0.82)
0.87 (0.74–1.01)
0.93 (0.82–1.04)
0.83 (0.68–1.02)
0.69 (0.53–0.88)
0.93 (0.80–1.08)
0.83 (0.71–0.97)
0.92 (0.77–1.10)
1.00 (0.87–1.15)
0.94 (0.83–1.07)
Worsening
nephropathy§jj
0.61 (0.53–0.70)
0.60 (0.47–0.77)
0.53 (0.43–0.66)
(See primary
outcome)
(See primary
outcome)
(See secondary
outcomes)
0.71 (0.44–1.16)
Composite renal
outcome 0.50
(0.32–0.77)
Composite renal
outcome**
0.95 (0.73–1.24)
—
—, not assessed/reported; CHF, congestive heart failure; CV, cardiovascular; CVD, cardiovascular disease; eGFR, estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate; ESRD, end-stage renal disease; HF, heart failure;
KCCQ TSS, Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire Total Symptom Score; MACE, major adverse cardiovascular event; MI, myocardial infarction; SGLT2, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2; NYHA, New
York Heart Association. Data in this table were adapted from Cefalu et al. (313). *Baseline characteristics for EMPEROR-Reduced displayed as empagliﬂozin, placebo. †Age was reported as means in all
trials; diabetes duration was reported as means in all trials except EMPA-REG OUTCOME, which reported as percentage of population with diabetes duration >10 years, and DECLARE-TIMI 58, which re-
ported median. ‡Signiﬁcant difference in A1C between groups (P < 0.05). ^AIC change of 0.30 in EMPA-REG OUTCOME is based on pooled results for both doses (i.e., 0.24% for 10 mg and 0.36% for
25 mg of empagliﬂozin). §Outcomes reported as hazard ratio (95% CI). jjDeﬁnitions of worsening nephropathy differed between trials. **Composite outcome in EMPEROR-Preserved: time to ﬁrst occur-
rence of chronic dialysis, renal transplantation; sustained reduction of $40% in eGFR, sustained eGFR <15 mL/min/1.73 m2 for individuals with baseline eGFR $30 mL/min/1.73 m2.
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S201
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

the symptomatic stages of heart failure
(stages C and D). People with diabetes
and an elevated natriuretic peptide level
without any symptoms of heart failure
should be considered to have stage B
heart failure, as there is evidence for in-
creased ﬁlling pressure and wall strain. In
people with diabetes and an abnormal
natriuretic peptide level, echocardiogra-
phy is recommended as the next step to
screen for structural heart disease and
echocardiographic Doppler indices for evi-
dence of diastolic dysfunction and in-
creased ﬁlling pressures (221). At this
stage, an interprofessional approach,
which should include a cardiovascular
disease specialist, is recommended to
implement a guideline-directed medical
treatment strategy, which may reduce
the risk of progression to symptomatic
stages of heart failure (213). The recom-
mendations for screening and treatment
of heart failure in people with diabetes
discussed in this section are consistent
with the ADA consensus report on heart
failure (7) and with current American
Heart Association/American College of
Cardiology/Heart Failure Society of Amer-
ica guidelines for the management of
heart failure (210).
Screening for Asymptomatic
Peripheral Artery Disease in People
With Diabetes
The risk for PAD in people with diabetes
is higher than that in people without
diabetes (222–224). In the PAD Aware-
ness, Risk, and Treatment: New Resour-
ces for Survival (PARTNERS) program,
30% of people aged 50–69 years with a
history of cigarette smoking or diabetes,
or aged $70 years regardless of risk fac-
tors, had PAD (225). Similarly, in other
screening studies, 26% of people with di-
abetes have been shown to have PAD
(226), and diabetes increased the odds of
having PAD by 85% (227). Notably, classi-
cal symptoms of claudication are uncom-
mon, and almost half of people with
newly diagnosed PAD were asymptom-
atic (225). Conversely, up to two-thirds
of people with asymptomatic PAD have
been shown to have comorbid diabetes
(228). Risk factors associated with an in-
creased risk for PAD in people with diabe-
tes include age, smoking, hypertension,
dyslipidemia,
worse
glycemic
control,
longer duration of diabetes, neuropathy,
and retinopathy as well as a prior history
of cardiovascular disease (229,230). In
addition, the presence of microvascular
disease is associated with adverse out-
comes in people with PAD, including an
increased risk for future limb amputa-
tion (231,232).
Screening for asymptomatic PAD may
lead to early detection and treatment strat-
egies to reduce the risk for progression of
PAD and limb preservation. In addition,
secondary prevention of PAD has been
shown to reduce adverse cardiovascu-
lar and limb outcomes. While a positive
screening test for PAD in an asymptom-
atic population has been associated
with
increased
cardiovascular
event
rates (233,234), prospective, randomized
studies addressing whether screening for
PAD in people with diabetes improves
long-term limb outcomes and cardiovas-
cular event rates are limited. In the
randomized controlled Viborg Vascular
(VIVA) trial, 50,156 participants were ran-
domized to combined vascular screening
for abdominal aortic aneurysm, PAD, and
hypertension or to no screening. Vascular
screening was associated with increased
pharmacologic therapy (antiplatelet, lipid-
lowering, and antihypertensive therapy),
reduced in-hospital time for PAD and
CAD, and reduced mortality (235). There-
fore, the committee recommends screen-
ing for asymptomatic PAD using ankle-
brachial index in people with diabetes at
high risk for PAD, including any of the fol-
lowing: age $50 years, diabetes with du-
ration $10 years, comorbid microvascular
disease, clinical evidence of foot compli-
cations, or any end-organ damage from
diabetes. Therefore, the committee rec-
ommends screening people with diabe-
tes and high risk for PAD, including
age $50 years, diabetes with duration
$10 years, microvascular disease, clini-
cal evidence of foot complications, or
any end-organ damage from diabetes.
Lifestyle and Pharmacologic
Interventions
Intensive lifestyle intervention focusing
on weight loss through decreased calo-
ric intake and increased physical activity,
as performed in the Action for Health
in Diabetes (Look AHEAD) trial, may be
considered for improving glucose control,
ﬁtness, and some ASCVD risk factors
(236). Individuals at increased ASCVD risk
should receive statin, ACE inhibitor, or
ARB therapy if the individual has hyper-
tension, and possibly aspirin, unless there
are contraindications to a particular drug
class.
Clear cardiovascular beneﬁt exists for
ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy in people
with diabetes. The Heart Outcomes Pre-
vention Evaluation (HOPE) study random-
ized 9,297 individuals aged $55 years
with a history of vascular disease or dia-
betes plus one other cardiovascular risk
factor to either ramipril or placebo. Rami-
pril signiﬁcantly reduced cardiovascular
and all-cause mortality, MI, and stroke
(237). ACE inhibitors or ARB therapy also
have well-established long-term beneﬁt
in people with diabetes and diabetic kid-
ney disease or hypertension, and these
agents are recommended for hyperten-
sion management in people with known
ASCVD (particularly coronary artery dis-
ease) (65,66,238). People with type 2 dia-
betes and CKD should be considered for
treatment with ﬁnerenone to reduce car-
diovascular outcomes and the risk of
CKD progression (239–242). b-Blockers
should be used in individuals with active
angina or HFrEF and for 3 years after MI
in those with preserved left ventricular
function (243,244).
Glucose-Lowering Therapies and
Cardiovascular Outcomes
In 2008, the FDA issued guidance for in-
dustry to perform cardiovascular out-
comes trials for all new medications for
the treatment of type 2 diabetes amid
concerns of increased cardiovascular risk
(245). Previously approved diabetes medi-
cations were not subject to the guidance.
Recently published cardiovascular out-
comes trials have provided additional
data on cardiovascular and renal out-
comes in people with type 2 diabetes
with cardiovascular disease or at high risk
for cardiovascular disease (Table 10.3A,
Table 10.3B, and Table 10.3C). An
expanded review of the effects of
glucose-lowering and other therapies
in people with CKD is included in Sec-
tion 11, “Chronic Kidney Disease and
Risk Management.”
Cardiovascular outcomes trials of di-
peptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibitors
have all, so far, not shown cardiovascular
beneﬁts relative to placebo. In addition,
the CAROLINA (Cardiovascular Outcome
Study of Linagliptin Versus Glimepiride in
Type 2 Diabetes) study demonstrated
noninferiority between a DPP-4 inhibitor,
linagliptin, and a sulfonylurea, glimepir-
ide, on cardiovascular outcomes despite
S202
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

lower rates of hypoglycemia in the lina-
gliptin treatment group (246). However,
results from other new agents have pro-
vided a mix of results.
SGLT2 Inhibitor Trials
The Bl 10773 (Empagliﬂozin) Cardiovas-
cular Outcome Event Trial in Type 2
Diabetes Mellitus Patients (EMPA-REG
OUTCOME) was a randomized, double-
blind trial that assessed the effect of
empagliﬂozin, an SGLT2 inhibitor, versus
placebo on cardiovascular outcomes in
7,020 people with type 2 diabetes and
existing cardiovascular disease. Study
participants had a mean age of 63 years,
57% had diabetes for over 10 years, and
99% had established cardiovascular dis-
ease. EMPA-REG OUTCOME showed that
over a median follow-up of 3.1 years,
treatment reduced the composite out-
come of MI, stroke, and cardiovascular
death by 14% (absolute rate 10.5% vs.
12.1% in the placebo group, HR in the
empagliﬂozin group 0.86 [95% CI 0.74–
0.99]; P = 0.04 for superiority) and car-
diovascular death by 38% (absolute rate
3.7% vs. 5.9%, HR 0.62 [95% CI 0.49–
0.77]; P < 0.001) (11).
Two large outcomes trials of the
SGLT2 inhibitor canagliﬂozin have been
conducted that separately assessed 1)
the cardiovascular effects of treatment
in individuals at high risk for major ad-
verse cardiovascular events (12) and 2)
the impact of canagliﬂozin therapy on
cardiorenal outcomes in people with
diabetes-related CKD (247). First, the
CANVAS Program integrated data from
two trials. The CANVAS trial that started
in 2009 was partially unblinded prior to
completion because of the need to ﬁle
interim cardiovascular outcomes data for
regulatory approval of the drug (248).
Thereafter, the postapproval CANVAS-
Renal (CANVAS-R) trial was started in
2014.
Combining
both
trials,
10,142
participants with type 2 diabetes were
randomized to canagliﬂozin or placebo
and were followed for an average of
3.6 years. The mean age of individuals
was 63 years, and 66% had a history of
cardiovascular disease. The combined
analysis of the two trials found that can-
agliﬂozin signiﬁcantly reduced the com-
posite outcome of cardiovascular death,
MI, or stroke versus placebo (occurring
in 26.9 vs. 31.5 participants per 1,000 pa-
tient-years; HR 0.86 [95% CI 0.75–0.97]).
The speciﬁc estimates for canagliﬂozin
versus placebo on the primary composite
cardiovascular outcome were HR 0.88
(95% CI 0.75–1.03) for the CANVAS trial
and 0.82 (0.66–1.01) for CANVAS-R, with
no heterogeneity found between trials. Of
note, there was an increased risk of lower-
limb amputation with canagliﬂozin (6.3 vs.
3.4 participants per 1,000 patient-years;
HR 1.97 [95% CI 1.41–2.75]) (12). Second,
the Canagliﬂozin and Renal Events in Dia-
betes with Established Nephropathy Clinical
Evaluation (CREDENCE) trial randomized
4,401 people with type 2 diabetes and
chronic diabetes–related kidney disease
(UACR >300 mg/g and eGFR 30 to
<90 mL/min/1.73 m2) to canagliﬂozin
100 mg daily or placebo (247). The primary
outcome was a composite of end-stage
kidney disease, doubling of serum creati-
nine, or death from renal or cardiovascu-
lar causes. The trial was stopped early
due to conclusive evidence of efﬁcacy
identiﬁed during a prespeciﬁed interim
analysis with no unexpected safety sig-
nals. The risk of the primary composite
outcome was 30% lower with canagliﬂo-
zin treatment than with placebo (HR 0.70
[95% CI 0.59–0.82]). Moreover, it reduced
the prespeciﬁed end point of end-stage
kidney disease alone by 32% (HR 0.68
[95% CI 0.54–0.86]). Canagliﬂozin was
additionally found to have a lower risk
of
the
composite
of cardiovascular
death, MI, or stroke (HR 0.80 [95% CI
0.67–0.95]) as well as lower risk of hos-
pitalizations for heart failure (HR 0.61
[95% CI 0.47–0.80]) and of the compos-
ite of cardiovascular death or hospitali-
zation for heart failure (HR 0.69 [95%
CI 0.57–0.83]). In terms of safety, no
signiﬁcant increase in lower-limb ampu-
tations, fractures, AKI, or hyperkalemia
was noted for canagliﬂozin relative to
placebo in CREDENCE. An increased risk
for diabetic ketoacidosis was noted, how-
ever, with 2.2 and 0.2 events per 1,000
patient-years noted in the canagliﬂozin
and placebo groups, respectively (HR 10.80
[95% CI 1.39–83.65]) (247).
The Dapagliﬂozin Effect on Cardiovascu-
lar Events-Thrombosis in Myocardial Infarc-
tion 58 (DECLARE-TIMI 58) trial was
another randomized, double-blind trial that
assessed the effects of dapagliﬂozin versus
placebo on cardiovascular and renal out-
comes in 17,160 people with type 2 diabe-
tes and established ASCVD or multiple risk
factors for ASCVD (249). Study participants
had a mean age of 64 years, with 40%
of study participants having established
ASCVD at baseline—a characteristic of this
trial that differs from other large cardiovas-
cular trials where a majority of participants
had established cardiovascular disease.
DECLARE-TIMI 58 met the prespeciﬁed cri-
teria for noninferiority to placebo with re-
spect to major adverse cardiovascular
events butdid not show alowerrateof ma-
jor adverse cardiovascular events when
compared with placebo (8.8% in the dapa-
gliﬂozin group and 9.4% in the placebo
group; HR 0.93 [95% CI 0.84–1.03]; P =
0.17). A lower rate of cardiovascular death
or hospitalization for heart failure was
noted (4.9% vs. 5.8%; HR 0.83 [95% CI
0.73–0.95]; P = 0.005), which reﬂected a
lower rate of hospitalization for heart failure
(HR 0.73 [95% CI 0.61–0.88]). No difference
was seen in cardiovascular death between
groups.
In the Dapagliﬂozin and Prevention of
Adverse Outcomes in Chronic Kidney
Disease (DAPA-CKD) trial (250), 4,304
individuals
with
CKD
(UACR
200–
5,000 mg/g and eGFR 25–75 mL/min/
1.73 m2), with or without diabetes,
were randomized to dapagliﬂozin 10 mg
daily or placebo. The primary outcome
was a composite of sustained decline in
eGFR of at least 50%, end-stage kidney
disease, or death from renal or cardio-
vascular causes. Over a median follow-
up period of 2.4 years, a primary out-
come event occurred in 9.2% of partici-
pants in the dapagliﬂozin group and
14.5% of those in the placebo group. The
risk of the primary composite outcome
was signiﬁcantly lower with dapagliﬂozin
therapy compared with placebo (HR 0.61
[95% CI 0.51–0.72]), as were the risks for
a renal composite outcome of sustained
decline in eGFR of at least 50%, end-
stage kidney disease, or death from renal
causes (HR 0.56 [95% CI 0.45–0.68]), and
a composite of cardiovascular death or
hospitalization for heart failure (HR 0.71
[95% CI 0.55–0.92]). The effects of dapa-
gliﬂozin therapy were similar in individu-
als with and without type 2 diabetes.
Results of the Dapagliﬂozin and Pre-
vention of Adverse Outcomes in Heart
Failure (DAPA-HF) trial, the Empagliﬂozin
Outcome Trial in Patients With Chronic
Heart Failure and a Reduced Ejection
Fraction (EMPEROR-Reduced), Empagli-
ﬂozin Outcome Trial in Patients With
Chronic Heart Failure With Preserved
Ejection Fraction (EMPEROR-Preserved),
Effects of Dapagliﬂozin on Biomarkers,
Symptoms
and
Functional
Status
in
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S203
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Patients With PRESERVED Ejection Frac-
tion Heart Failure (PRESERVED-HF), and
Dapagliﬂozin Evaluation to Improve the
Lives of Patients with Preserved Ejection
Fraction Heart Failure (DELIVER), which
assessed the effects of dapagliﬂozin and
empagliﬂozin in individuals with estab-
lished heart failure (14,242,251–253), are
described below in GLUCOSE-LOWERING THERA-
PIES AND HEART FAILURE.
The Evaluation of Ertugliﬂozin Efﬁcacy
and
Safety Cardiovascular
Outcomes
Trial (VERTIS CV) (254) was a random-
ized, double-blind trial that established
the effects of ertugliﬂozin versus placebo
on cardiovascular outcomes in 8,246 peo-
ple with type 2 diabetes and established
ASCVD. Participants were assigned to the
addition of 5 mg or 15 mg of ertugliﬂozin
or to placebo once daily to background
standard care. Study participants had a
mean age of 64.4 years and a mean dura-
tion of diabetes of 13 years at baseline and
were followed for a median of 3.0 years.
VERTIS CV met the prespeciﬁed criteria
for noninferiority of ertugliﬂozin to pla-
cebo with respect to the primary out-
come of major adverse cardiovascular
events (11.9% in the pooled ertugliﬂozin
group and 11.9% in the placebo group;
HR 0.97 [95% CI 0.85–1.11]; P < 0.001).
Ertugliﬂozin was not superior to placebo
for the key secondary outcomes of death
from cardiovascular causes or hospitali-
zation for heart failure; death from car-
diovascular causes; or the composite of
death from renal causes, renal replacement
therapy, or doubling of the serum creati-
nine level.The HR for a secondary outcome
of hospitalization for heart failure (ertugli-
ﬂozin vs. placebo) was 0.70 [95% CI
0.54–0.90], consistent with ﬁndings from
other SGLT2 inhibitor cardiovascular out-
comes trials.
GLP-1 Receptor Agonist Trials
The Liraglutide Effect and Action in
Diabetes:
Evaluation
of
Cardiovascular
Outcome Results (LEADER) trial was a ran-
domized, double-blind trial that assessed
the effect of liraglutide, a glucagon-like
peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist, ver-
sus placebo on cardiovascular outcomes
in 9,340 people with type 2 diabetes at
high risk for cardiovascular disease or
with cardiovascular disease (256). Study
participants had a mean age of 64 years
and a mean duration of diabetes of
nearly 13 years. Over 80% of study par-
ticipants had established cardiovascular
disease. After a median follow-up of
3.8 years, LEADER showed that the pri-
mary composite outcome (MI, stroke, or
cardiovascular death) occurred in fewer
participants in the treatment group (13.0%)
than in the placebo group (14.9%) (HR 0.87
[95% CI 0.78–0.97]; P < 0.001 for nonin-
feriority; P = 0.01 for superiority). Deaths
from cardiovascular causes were signiﬁ-
cantly reduced in the liraglutide group
(4.7%) compared with the placebo group
(6.0%) (HR 0.78 [95% CI 0.66–0.93]; P =
0.007) (256).
Results from a moderate-sized trial
of another GLP-1 receptor agonist, sema-
glutide, were consistent with the LEADER
trial (257). Semaglutide is a once-weekly
GLP-1 receptor agonist approved by the
FDA for the treatment of type 2 diabetes.
The Trial to Evaluate Cardiovascular and
Other Long-term Outcomes With Semaglu-
tide in Subjects With Type 2 Diabetes
(SUSTAIN-6) was the initial randomized
trial powered to test noninferiority of sem-
aglutide for the purpose of regulatory ap-
proval (257). In this study, 3,297 people
with type 2 diabetes were randomized to
receive once-weekly semaglutide (0.5 mg
or 1.0 mg) or placebo for 2 years. The pri-
mary outcome (the ﬁrst occurrence of car-
diovascular death, nonfatal MI, or nonfatal
stroke) occurred in 108 individuals (6.6%)
in the semaglutide group vs. 146 individu-
als (8.9%) in the placebo group (HR 0.74
[95% CI 0.58–0.95]; P < 0.001). More indi-
viduals discontinued treatment in the sem-
aglutide group because of adverse events,
mainly gastrointestinal. The cardiovascular
effects of the oral formulation of semaglu-
tide compared with placebo have been
assessed in Peptide Innovation for Early
Diabetes Treatment (PIONEER) 6, a preap-
proval trial designed to rule out an unac-
ceptable increase in cardiovascular risk
(257). In this trial of 3,183 people with
type 2 diabetes and high cardiovascular
risk followed for a median of 15.9 months,
oral semaglutide was noninferior to pla-
cebo for the primary composite outcome
of cardiovascular death, nonfatal MI, or
nonfatal stroke (HR 0.79 [95% CI 0.57–
1.11]; P < 0.001 for noninferiority) (257).
The cardiovascular effects of this formula-
tion of semaglutide will be further tested
in a large, longer-term outcomes trial.
The Harmony Outcomes trial random-
ized 9,463 people with type 2 diabetes
and cardiovascular disease to once-weekly
subcutaneous albiglutide or matching pla-
cebo, in addition to their standard care
(258). Over a median duration of 1.6 years,
the GLP-1 receptor agonist reduced the
risk of cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke
to an incidence rate of 4.6 events per
100 person-years in the albiglutide group
vs. 5.9 events in the placebo group (HR
0.78, P = 0.0006 for superiority) (258).
This agent is not currently available for
clinical use.
The Researching Cardiovascular Events
With a Weekly Incretin in Diabetes
(REWIND) trial was a randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial that assessed
the effect of the once-weekly GLP-1 recep-
tor agonist dulaglutide versus placebo on
major adverse cardiovascular events in
9,990 people with type 2 diabetes at
risk for cardiovascular events or with a his-
tory of cardiovascular disease (259). Study
participants had a mean age of 66 years
and a mean duration of diabetes of
10 years. Approximately 32% of partici-
pants had history of atherosclerotic cardio-
vascular events at baseline. After a median
follow-up of 5.4 years, the primary com-
posite outcome of nonfatal MI, nonfatal
stroke, or death from cardiovascular
causes occurred in 12.0% and 13.4% of
participants in the dulaglutide and pla-
cebo treatment groups, respectively
(HR 0.88 [95% CI 0.79–0.99]; P = 0.026).
These ﬁndings equated to incidence rates
of 2.4 and 2.7 events per 100 person-years,
respectively. The results were consistent
across the subgroups of individuals with
and without history of CV events. All-cause
mortality did not differ between groups
(P = 0.067).
The
Evaluation
of
Lixisenatide
in
Acute Coronary Syndrome (ELIXA) trial
studied the once-daily GLP-1 receptor
agonist lixisenatide on cardiovascular
outcomes in people with type 2 diabe-
tes who had had a recent acute coro-
nary event (261). A total of 6,068
people with type 2 diabetes with a re-
cent hospitalization for MI or unstable
angina within the previous 180 days
were randomized to receive lixisena-
tide or placebo in addition to standard
care and were followed for a median
of 2.1 years. The primary outcome of
cardiovascular death, MI, stroke, or
hospitalization for unstable angina oc-
curred in 406 individuals (13.4%) in
the lixisenatide group vs. 399 (13.2%)
in the placebo group (HR 1.2 [95% CI
0.89–1.17]),
which
demonstrated
the
noninferiority of lixisenatide to placebo
S204
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

(P < 0.001) but did not show superiority
(P = 0.81).
The Exenatide Study of Cardiovascu-
lar Event Lowering (EXSCEL) trial also
reported results with the once-weekly
GLP-1 receptor agonist extended-release
exenatide and found that major adverse
cardiovascular events were numerically
lower with use of extended-release exe-
natide compared with placebo, although
this difference was not statistically signif-
icant (261). A total of 14,752 people
with type 2 diabetes (of whom 10,782
[73.1%] had previous cardiovascular
disease) were randomized to receive
extended-release exenatide 2 mg or
placebo and followed for a median of
3.2 years. The primary end point of
cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke oc-
curred in 839 individuals (11.4%; 3.7
events per 100 person-years) in the ex-
enatide group and in 905 individuals
(12.2%; 4.0 events per 100 person-
years) in the placebo group (HR 0.91
[95% CI 0.83–1.00]; P < 0.001 for non-
inferiority), but exenatide was not supe-
rior to placebo with respect to the
primary end point (P = 0.06 for superi-
ority). However, all-cause mortality was
lower in the exenatide group (HR 0.86
[95% CI 0.77–0.97]). The incidence of
acute pancreatitis, pancreatic cancer,
medullary thyroid carcinoma, and seri-
ous adverse events did not differ signiﬁ-
cantly between the two groups.
In summary, there are now numerous
large randomized controlled trials re-
porting statistically signiﬁcant reduc-
tions in cardiovascular events for three
of the FDA-approved SGLT2 inhibitors
(empagliﬂozin, canagliﬂozin, and dapa-
gliﬂozin, with lesser beneﬁts seen with
ertugliﬂozin) and four FDA-approved
GLP-1 receptor agonists (liraglutide, al-
biglutide [although that agent was re-
moved from the market for business
reasons], semaglutide [lower risk of
cardiovascular events in a moderate-
sized clinical trial but one not powered
as a cardiovascular outcomes trial],
and dulaglutide). Meta-analyses of the
trials reported to date suggest that
GLP-1 receptor agonists and SGLT2 in-
hibitors reduce risk of atherosclerotic
major adverse cardiovascular events to a
comparable degree in people with type 2
diabetes and established ASCVD (262,263).
SGLT2 inhibitors also reduce risk of heart
failure hospitalization and progression of
kidney disease in people with established
ASCVD, multiple risk factors for ASCVD, or
albuminuric kidney disease (264,265). In
people with type 2 diabetes and estab-
lished ASCVD, multiple ASCVD risk factors,
or diabetic kidney disease, an SGLT2 in-
hibitor with demonstrated cardiovascu-
lar beneﬁt is recommended to reduce
the risk of major adverse cardiovascular
events and/or heart failure hospitaliza-
tion. In people with type 2 diabetes and
established ASCVD or multiple risk factors
for ASCVD, a GLP-1 receptor agonist with
demonstrated cardiovascular beneﬁt is
recommended to reduce the risk of ma-
jor adverse cardiovascular events. For
many individuals, use of either an SGLT2
inhibitor or a GLP-1 receptor agonist to
reduce cardiovascular risk is appropriate.
Emerging data suggest that use of both
classes of drugs will provide an additive
cardiovascular and kidney outcomes ben-
eﬁt; thus, combination therapy with an
SGLT2 inhibitor and a GLP-1 receptor ag-
onist may be considered to provide the
complementary outcomes beneﬁts asso-
ciated with these classes of medication.
Evidence to support such an approach
includes
ﬁndings
from
AMPLITUDE-O
(Effect of Efpeglenatide on Cardiovascular
Outcomes), an outcomes trial of people
with type 2 diabetes and either cardio-
vascular or kidney disease plus at least
one other risk factor randomized to the
investigational GLP-1 receptor agonist ef-
peglenatide or placebo (266). Randomiza-
tion was stratiﬁed by current or potential
use of SGLT2 inhibitor therapy, a class ul-
timately used by >15% of the trial par-
ticipants. Over a median follow-up of 1.8
years, efpeglenatide therapy reduced the
risk of incident major adverse cardiovas-
cular events by 27% and of a composite
renal outcome event by 32%. Importantly,
the effects of efpeglenatide did not vary
by use of SGLT2 inhibitors, suggesting that
the beneﬁcial effects of the GLP-1 recep-
tor agonist were independent of those
provided by SGLT2 inhibitor therapy (267).
Efpeglenatide is currently not approved by
the FDA for use in the U.S.
Prevention and Treatment of Heart
Failure
Prevention of Symptomatic Heart Failure
ACE Inhibitors/ARBs and b-Blockers. Early
primary prevention strategies and treat-
ment of associated risk factors reduce in-
cident, symptomatic heart failure and
should include lifestyle intervention with
diet, physical activity, weight control, and
smoking cessation (268–271). The vast
majority of incident heart failure is pre-
ceded by hypertension; up to 91% of all
new heart failure development in the
Framingham cohort occurred in people
with a previous diagnosis of hypertension
(272). Therefore, management of hyper-
tension constitutes a key goal in people
with diabetes and stage A or B heart fail-
ure. For example, in the UKPDS trial, in-
tensive blood pressure control in people
with type 2 diabetes reduced the risk for
heart failure by 56% (273). Similarly, in
the SPRINT trial, intensive treatment of
hypertension decreased the risk for de-
velopment of incident heart failure by
36% (274). As discussed in the HYPERTEN-
SION/BLOOD PRESSURE CONTROL section above,
use of ACE inhibitors or ARBs is the pre-
ferred treatment strategy for manage-
ment of hypertension in people with
diabetes, particularly in the presence of
albuminuria or coronary artery disease.
People with diabetes and stage B heart
failure who remain asymptomatic but
have evidence of structural heart disease,
including history of MI, acute coronary
syndrome, or left ventricular ejection frac-
tion (LVEF) #40%, should be treated
with ACE inhibitors/ARBs plus b-blockers
according to current treatment guidelines
(210). In the landmark Studies of Left
Ventricular Dysfunction (SOLVD) study, in
which 15% of people had diabetes, treat-
ment with enalapril reduced incident
heart failure in people with asymptomatic
left ventricular dysfunction by 20% (275).
In the Survival and Ventricular Enlarge-
ment (SAVE) study, which enrolled asymp-
tomatic people with reduced LVEF after
MI, including 23% people with diabetes,
treatment with captopril reduced the de-
velopment of heart failure by 37% (276).
Subsequent retrospective analyses from
both trials revealed that concomitant use
of b-blockers was associated with de-
creased risk of progression to symptom-
atic heart failure (277,278). The Carvedilol
Post-Infarct Survival Control in Left Ven-
tricular Dysfunction (CAPRICORN) study
randomized people with a history of MI
and reduced LVEF to treatment with car-
vedilol (279). Approximately half of the
study participants were asymptomatic,
and 23% of study participants had a his-
tory of diabetes. Treatment with carvedi-
lol reduced mortality by 23%, and there
was a 14% risk reduction for heart failure
hospitalization. Finally, in the Reversal of
Ventricular Remodeling With Toprol-XL
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S205
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

(REVERT) trial, in which 45% of the peo-
ple enrolled had diabetes, metoprolol
improved adverse cardiac remodeling in
asymptomatic individuals with an LVEF
<40% and mild left ventricular dilatation
(280).
SGLT Inhibitors. As reviewed in detail in
the following section, SGLT2 inhibitors
constitute a key treatment approach to
reduce cardiovascular disease and heart
failure outcomes in people with diabe-
tes. People with type 2 diabetes and
increased cardiovascular risk or estab-
lished cardiovascular disease should be
treated with an SGLT2 inhibitor to pre-
vent the development of incident heart
failure. This includes people with type 2
diabetes and asymptomatic stage B heart
failure. In the EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial,
only 10% of study participants had a
prior history of heart failure, and treat-
ment with empagliﬂozin reduced the rel-
ative risk for hospitalization from heart
failure by 35% (11). In the CANVAS Pro-
gram, hospitalization from heart failure
was reduced by 33% in people allocated
to canagliﬂozin, and only 14% of individu-
als enrolled had a prior history of heart
failure (12). In the DAPA-HF study, only
10% of study participants had a prior
history of heart failure, and dapagliﬂozin
reduced
cardiovascular
mortality
and
hospitalization for heart failure by 17%,
which was consistent across multiple
study subgroups regardless of a prior his-
tory of heart failure (249). Finally, in the
Effect of Sotagliﬂozin on Cardiovascular
and Renal Events in Participants With
Type 2 Diabetes and Moderate Renal
Impairment Who Are at Cardiovascular
Risk (SCORED) trial, randomization to the
SGLT1/2 inhibitor sotagliﬂozin reduced the
primary outcome of death from cardiovas-
cular causes, hospitalizations for heart fail-
ure, and urgent visits for heart failure in
people with type 2 diabetes, CKD, and risk
for cardiovascular disease (281). Therefore,
SGLT inhibitor treatment is recommended
in asymptomatic people with type 2 dia-
betes at risk or with established cardiovas-
cular disease to prevent incident heart
failure and hospitalization from heart
failure.
Finerenone. Finerenone is a nonsteroidal
MRA and has recently been studied in
people with diabetes and diabetic kid-
ney disease, including the Finerenone
in Reducing Kidney Failure and Disease
Progression in Diabetic Kidney Disease
(FIDELIO-DKD) and
the Efﬁcacy and
Safety of Finerenone in Subjects With
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and the Clini-
cal Diagnosis of Diabetic Kidney Disease
(FIGARO-DKD) studies. In FIDELIO-DKD,
ﬁnerenone was compared with placebo
for the primary outcome of kidney fail-
ure, a sustained decrease of at least
40% in the eGFR from baseline, or
death from renal causes in people with
type 2 diabetes and diabetic kidney
disease (282). A prespeciﬁed secondary
outcome
was
death
from
cardio-
vascular causes, nonfatal MI, nonfatal
stroke, or hospitalization for heart fail-
ure, which was reduced by 13% in the
ﬁnerenone group. The incidence of
heart failure hospitalization occurred
less in the ﬁnerenone-treated group,
and only 7.7% of study participants
had a prior history of heart failure. In
the FIGARO-DKD trial, ﬁnerenone re-
duced the primary outcome of death
from cardiovascular causes, nonfatal
MI, nonfatal stroke, or hospitalization
for heart failure (HR 0.87 [95% CI
0.76–0.98]; P = 0.03) in people with
type 2 diabetes and diabetic kidney
disease (240). Only 7.8% of all partici-
pants had a prior history of heart
failure, and the incidence of hospitali-
zation for heart failure was reduced in
the ﬁnerenone-allocated treatment arm
(HR 0.71 [95% CI 0.56–0.90]). Owing to
these observations, treatment with ﬁ-
nerenone is recommended in people
with type 2 diabetes and diabetic kidney
disease to reduce the risk of progression
from stage A heart failure to symptom-
atic incident heart failure.
Treatment of Symptomatic Heart
Failure
In general, current guideline-directed
medical therapy for a history of MI and
symptomatic stage C and D heart failure
in people with diabetes is similar to
that for people without diabetes. At
these advanced stages of heart failure,
a collaborative approach with a cardio-
vascular specialist is recommended. The
treatment recommendations are de-
tailed in current 2022 American Heart
Association/American College of Cardi-
ology/Heart Failure Society of America
guidelines for the management of heart
failure (210).
Glucose-Lowering Medications and
Heart Failure: Discussion of Heart
Failure Outcomes
Data on the effects of glucose-lowering
agents on heart failure outcomes have
demonstrated that thiazolidinediones
have a strong and consistent relation-
ship with increased risk of heart failure
(283–285). Therefore, thiazolidinedione
use should be avoided in people with
symptomatic heart failure. Restrictions
to use of metformin in people with
medically treated heart failure were re-
moved by the FDA in 2006 (286). Obser-
vational studies of people with type 2
diabetes and heart failure suggest that
metformin users have better outcomes
than individuals treated with other anti-
hyperglycemic agents (287); however,
no randomized trial of metformin ther-
apy has been conducted in people with
heart failure. Metformin may be used
for the management of hyperglycemia
in people with stable heart failure as
long as kidney function remains within
the recommended range for use (288).
Recent studies examining the rela-
tionship between DPP-4 inhibitors and
heart failure have had mixed results.
The Saxagliptin Assessment of Vascular
Outcomes Recorded in Patients with Di-
abetes Mellitus–Thrombolysis in Myo-
cardial Infarction 53 (SAVOR-TIMI 53)
study showed that individuals treated
with the DPP-4 inhibitor saxagliptin were
more likely to be hospitalized for heart
failure than those given placebo (3.5%
vs. 2.8%, respectively) (289). However,
three
other
cardiovascular
outcomes
trials—Examination of Cardiovascular Out-
comes with Alogliptin versus Standard of
Care (EXAMINE) (290), Trial Evaluating
Cardiovascular Outcomes with Sitagliptin
(TECOS) (291), and the Cardiovascular
and Renal Microvascular Outcome Study
With Linagliptin (CARMELINA) (292)—did
not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant increase in risk of
heart failure hospitalization with DPP-4
inhibitor use compared with placebo. No
increased risk of heart failure hospitaliza-
tion has been identiﬁed in the cardiovas-
cular
outcomes
trials
of
the
GLP-1
receptor agonists lixisenatide, liraglutide,
semaglutide, exenatide once weekly,
albiglutide, or dulaglutide compared
with placebo (Table 10.3B) (255,256,
259–261).
Reduced incidence of heart failure
has been observed with the use of
SGLT2 inhibitors (11,247,249). In EMPA-REG
S206
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

OUTCOME, the addition of empagliﬂozin to
standard care led to a signiﬁcant 35% re-
duction in hospitalization for heart failure
compared with placebo (11). Although the
majority of individuals in the study did not
have heart failure at baseline, this beneﬁt
was consistent in individuals with and with-
out a history of heart failure (13). Similarly,
in CANVAS and DECLARE-TIMI 58, there
were 33% and 27% reductions in hospi-
talization for heart failure, respectively,
with SGLT2 inhibitor use versus pla-
cebo (12,249). Additional data from the
CREDENCE trial with canagliﬂozin showed
a 39% reduction in hospitalization for
heart failure, and 31% reduction in the
composite of cardiovascular death or
hospitalization for heart failure, in a dia-
betic kidney disease population with
albuminuria (UACR >300–5,000 mg/g)
(247). These combined ﬁndings from four
large outcomes trials of three different
SGLT2 inhibitors are highly consistent and
clearly indicate robust beneﬁts of SGLT2
inhibitors in the prevention of heart
failure hospitalizations. The EMPA-REG
OUTCOME, CANVAS, DECLARE-TIMI 58,
and CREDENCE trials suggested, but did
not prove, that SGLT2 inhibitors would
be beneﬁcial in the treatment of people
with established heart failure. More re-
cently, the placebo-controlled DAPA-HF
trial evaluated the effects of dapagliﬂozin
on the primary outcome of a composite
of worsening heart failure or cardiovascu-
lar death in individuals with New York
Heart Association (NYHA) class II, III, or IV
heart failure and an ejection fraction of
40% or less. Of the 4,744 trial partici-
pants, 45% had a history of type 2 diabe-
tes. Over a median of 18.2 months, the
group assigned to dapagliﬂozin treatment
had a lower risk of the primary outcome
(HR 0.74 [95% CI 0.65–0.85]), lower risk
of ﬁrst worsening heart failure event (HR
0.70 [95% CI 0.59–0.83]), and lower risk
of cardiovascular death (HR 0.82 [95% CI
0.69–0.98]) compared with placebo. The
effect of dapagliﬂozin on the primary out-
come was consistent regardless of the
presence or absence of type 2 diabetes
(14).
EMPEROR-Reduced assessed the ef-
fects of empagliﬂozin 10 mg once daily
versus placebo on a primary composite
outcome of cardiovascular death or hos-
pitalization for worsening heart failure
in a population of 3,730 individuals
with NYHA class II, III, or IV heart failure
and an ejection fraction of 40% or less
(253). At baseline, 49.8% of participants
had a history of diabetes. Over a me-
dian follow-up of 16 months, those in
the empagliﬂozin-treated group had a
reduced risk of the primary outcome
(HR 0.75 [95% CI 0.65–0.86]; P < 0.001)
and fewer total hospitalizations for heart
failure (HR 0.70 [95% CI 0.58–0.85]; P <
0.001). The effect of empagliﬂozin on the
primary outcome was consistent irrespec-
tive of diabetes diagnosis at baseline. The
risk of a prespeciﬁed renal composite
outcome (chronic dialysis, renal trans-
plantation, or a sustained reduction in
eGFR) was lower in the empagliﬂozin
group than in the placebo group (1.6% in
the empagliﬂozin group vs. 3.1% in the pla-
cebo group; HR 0.50 [95% CI 0.32–0.77]).
EMPEROR-Preserved, a randomized
double-blinded placebo-controlled trial
of 5,988 adults with NYHA functional
class I–IV chronic HFpEF (LVEF >40%),
evaluated the efﬁcacy of empagliﬂozin
10 mg daily versus placebo on top of
standard of care on the primary out-
come of composite cardiovascular death
or hospitalization for heart failure (242).
Approximately 50% of subjects had type 2
diabetes at baseline. Over a median of
26.2 months, there was a 21% reduction
(HR 0.79 [95% CI 0.69–0.90]; P < 0.001)
of the primary outcome. The effects of
empagliﬂozin were consistent in people
with or without diabetes (242).
In the DELIVER trial, 6,263 individuals
with heart failure and an ejection frac-
tion >40% were randomized to receive
either dapagliﬂozin or placebo (252).
The primary outcome of a composite
of worsening heart failure, deﬁned as
hospitalization or urgent visit for heart
failure, or cardiovascular death was re-
duced by 18% in individuals treated
with dapagliﬂozin compared with pla-
cebo (HR 0.82 [95% CI 0.73–0.92]; P <
0.001). Approximately 44% of individu-
als randomized to either dapagliﬂozin or
placebo had type 2 diabetes, and results
were consistent regardless of the pres-
ence of type 2 diabetes.
A large recent meta-analysis (293) of
data from EMPEROR-Reduced, EMPEROR-
Preserved, DAPA-HF, DELIVER, and the
Effect of Sotagliﬂozin on Cardiovascular
Events in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes
Post Worsening Heart Failure (SOLOIST-
WHF) trial included 21,947 individuals
and demonstrated reduced risk for the
composite of cardiovascular death or hos-
pitalization for heart failure, cardiovascular
death, ﬁrst hospitalization for heart failure,
and all-cause mortality. The ﬁndings on
the studied end points were consistent in
both trials of heart failure with mildly re-
duced or preserved ejection fraction and
in all ﬁve trials combined. Collectively,
these studies indicate that SGLT2 inhibi-
tors reduce the risk for heart failure hospi-
talization and cardiovascular death in a
wide range of people with heart failure.
In addition to the hospitalization and
mortality beneﬁt in people with heart
failure, several recent analyses have
addressed whether SGLT2 inhibitor treat-
ment improves clinical stability and func-
tional status in individuals with heart
failure. In 3,730 individuals with NYHA
class II–IV heart failure with an ejection
fraction of #40%, treatment with empa-
gliﬂozin reduced the combined risk of
death, hospitalization for heart failure, or
an emergent/urgent heart failure visit
requiring intravenous treatment and re-
duced the total number of hospitalizations
for heart failure requiring intensive care, a
vasopressor or positive inotropic drug, or
mechanical or surgical intervention (294).
In addition, individuals treated with empa-
gliﬂozin were more likely to experience
an improvement in NYHA functional class
(294). In people hospitalized for acute de
novo or decompensated chronic heart fail-
ure, initiation of empagliﬂozin treatment
during hospitalization reduced the primary
outcome of a composite of death from
any cause, number of heart failure events
and time to ﬁrst heart failure event, or a
5-point or greater difference in change
from baseline in the Kansas City Cardio-
myopathy Questionnaire Total Symptom
Score (295). Furthermore, PRESERVED-
HF, a multicenter study (26 sites in the
U.S.), showed that dapagliﬂozin treat-
ment leads to signiﬁcant improvement in
both symptoms and physical limitation as
well as objective measures of exercise
function in people with chronic HFpEF,
regardless of diabetes status (251). Fi-
nally, canagliﬂozin improved heart failure
symptoms assessed using the Kansas
City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire To-
tal Symptom Score, irrespective of LVEF
or the presence of diabetes (296).
Therefore, in people with type 2 diabe-
tes and established HFpEF or HFrEF, an
SGLT2 inhibitor with proven beneﬁt in
this patient population is recommended
to reduce the risk of worsening heart fail-
ure and cardiovascular death. In addition,
an SGLT2 inhibitor is recommended in
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S207
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

this patient population to improve symp-
toms, physical limitations, and quality of
life. The beneﬁts seen in this patient pop-
ulation likely represent a class effect, and
they appear unrelated to glucose lower-
ing, given comparable outcomes in peo-
ple with heart failure with and without
diabetes.
Sotagliflozin
Sotagliﬂozin, a dual SGLT1 and SGLT2 in-
hibitor, was recently approved by the
FDA in the U.S. to reduce the risk of
cardiovascular death, hospitalization for
heart failure, and urgent heart failure
in people with heart failure or type 2
diabetes, CKD, and other cardiovascular
risk factors. This drug is distinct from
other SGLT inhibitors, as it lowers glu-
cose via delayed glucose absorption in
the gut via inhibition of the cotrans-
porter SGLT1 in addition to increasing
urinary glucose excretion; however, it is
not currently approved by the FDA for
glycemic management of type 1 or
type 2 diabetes. Sotagliﬂozin was evalu-
ated in the SCORED trial (281) and
SOLOIST-WHF trial (297). A total of
10,584 people with type 2 diabetes,
CKD, and additional cardiovascular risk
were enrolled in SCORED and random-
ized to sotagliﬂozin 200 mg once daily
(uptitrated to 400 mg once daily if toler-
ated) or placebo. SCORED ended early
due to a lack of funding; thus, changes
to the prespeciﬁed primary end points
were made prior to unblinding to accom-
modate a lower-than-anticipated number
of end point events. The primary end
point of the trial was the total number of
deaths from cardiovascular causes, hospi-
talizations for heart failure, and urgent
visits for heart failure. After a median of
16 months of follow-up, the rate of pri-
mary end point events was reduced with
sotagliﬂozin (5.6 events per 100 patient-
years in the sotagliﬂozin group and 7.5
events per 100 patient-years in the pla-
cebo group [HR 0.74; [95% CI 0.63–0.88];
P < 0.001]). Sotagliﬂozin also reduced
the risk of the secondary end point of to-
tal number of hospitalizations for heart
failure and urgent visits for heart failure
(3.5% in the sotagliﬂozin group and 5.1%
in the placebo group [HR 0.67 [95% CI
0.55–0.82]; P < 0.001]) but not the sec-
ondary end point of deaths from cardio-
vascular causes. No signiﬁcant between-
group differences were found for the
outcome of all-cause mortality or for a
composite renal outcome comprising the
ﬁrst occurrence of long-term dialysis, re-
nal transplantation, or a sustained reduc-
tion in eGFR. In general, the adverse
effects of sotagliﬂozin were similar to
those seen with use of SGLT2 inhibitors,
but they also included an increased rate
of diarrhea potentially related to the in-
hibition of SGLT1. In general, the adverse
effects of sotagliﬂozin were similar to
those seen with use of SGLT2 inhibitors,
but they also included an increased rate
of diarrhea potentially related to the in-
hibition of SGLT1.
In SOLOIST-WHF, 1,222 people with
type 2 diabetes who were recently hos-
pitalized for worsening heart failure
were randomized to sotagliﬂozin 200 mg
once daily (with uptitration to 400 mg
once daily if tolerated) or placebo either
before or within 3 days after hospital
discharge. Individuals were eligible if
hospitalized for signs and symptoms of
heart failure (including elevated natri-
uretic peptide levels) requiring treatment
with intravenous diuretic therapy. Exclu-
sion criteria included end-stage heart fail-
ure, recent acute coronary syndrome or
intervention, or an eGFR <30 mL/min/
1.73 m2. Individuals were required to be
clinically stable prior to randomization,
which was deﬁned as no use of supple-
mental oxygen, systolic blood pressure
$100 mmHg, and no need for intrave-
nous inotropic or vasodilator therapy
other than nitrates. Similar to SCORED,
SOLOIST-WHF ended early due to a lack
of funding, resulting in a change to the
prespeciﬁed primary end point prior to
unblinding to accommodate a lower-than-
anticipated number of end point events. At
a median follow-up of 9 months, the rate
of primary end point events (the total
number of cardiovascular deaths and hos-
pitalizations and urgent visits for heart
failure) was lower in the sotagliﬂozin
group than in the placebo group (51.0 vs.
76.3; HR 0.67 [95% CI 0.52–0.85]; P <
0.001). No signiﬁcant between-group dif-
ferences were found in the rates of car-
diovascular death or all-cause mortality.
Both diarrhea (6.1% vs. 3.4%) and severe
hypoglycemia (1.5% vs. 0.3%) were more
common with sotagliﬂozin than with pla-
cebo. The trial was originally also intended
to evaluate the effects of SGLT inhibition
in people with HFpEF, and ultimately no
evidence of heterogeneity of treatment
effect by ejection fraction was noted.
However, the relatively small percentage
of such individuals enrolled (only 21% of
participants had ejection fraction >50%)
and the early termination of the trial lim-
ited the ability to determine the effects
of sotagliﬂozin in HFpEF speciﬁcally (297).
One concern with expanded use of
SGLT inhibition is the infrequent but se-
rious risk of diabetic ketoacidosis, in-
cluding the atypical presentation of
euglycemic ketoacidosis. There are mul-
tiple proposed pathways through which
SGLT inhibition results in ketosis (in-
creased b-hydroxybutyrate and acetoa-
cetate), such as increased production
due to reduction in insulin doses, in-
creases in glucagon levels leading to in-
creased lipolysis and ketone production,
and decreased renal clearance of ke-
tones (298,299). Thus, the use of SGLT
inhibitors (whether for glycemic control
or another indication) increases the sus-
ceptibility to diabetic ketoacidosis, par-
ticularly when other risk factors or
situations occur (including, but not lim-
ited to, insulin pump malfunctions, sig-
niﬁcant reduction in insulin doses, and
nutritional intake plans with prolonged
periods
of
fasting
or
carbohydrate
restriction). Although there were low
rates of ketoacidosis in the cardiovascu-
lar and heart failure outcomes trials
evaluating SGLT inhibition, these studies
excluded individuals with type 1 diabe-
tes and/or recent history of diabetic ke-
toacidosis (297,300). To decrease the
risk of ketoacidosis when using SGLT in-
hibition in people with type 1 diabetes,
it is recommended that clinicians assess
the underlying susceptibility; provide
education regarding the risks, symp-
toms, and prevention strategies; and
prescribe home monitoring supplies
for b-hydroxybutyrate (299,301). Use
of these processes may have contrib-
uted to the lower rates of ketoacidosis
seen in some of the studies of these
agents for adjunctive glycemic man-
agement in people with type 1 diabe-
tes (302–304) compared with those
that did not include preventative strate-
gies (298,305). Reassessment of sus-
ceptibility, education, and provision of
monitoring supplies should reoccur
throughout the duration of SGLT in-
hibitor treatment, particularly as pre-
ventative strategies and monitoring
can minimize, but not eliminate, the
risk of ketoacidosis in those who are
susceptible (306,307).
S208
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Finerenone in People With Type 2 Diabetes
and Chronic Kidney Disease
As discussed in detail in Section 11,
“Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Mana-
gement,” people with diabetes are at an
increased risk for CKD, which increases
cardiovascular risk (308). Finerenone, a
selective nonsteroidal MRA, has been
shown in the FIDELIO-DKD trial to im-
prove CKD outcomes in people with
type 2 diabetes with stage 3 or 4 CKD
and severe albuminuria (281). In the
FIGARO-DKD trial, 7,437 individuals with
UACR 30–300 mg/g and eGFR 25–90 mL/
min/1.73 m2 or UACR 300–5,000 and
eGFR $60 mL/min/1.73 m2 on maximum
dose of renin-angiotensin system blockade
were randomized to receive ﬁnerenone
or placebo (240). The HR of the primary
outcome of cardiovascular death, nonfatal
MI, nonfatal stroke, or hospitalization
from heart failure was reduced by 13% in
individuals treated with ﬁnerenone. A pre-
speciﬁed subgroup analysis from FIGARO-
DKD further revealed that in individuals
without symptomatic HFrEF, ﬁnerenone
reduces the risk for new-onset heart fail-
ure and improves heart failure outcomes
in people with type 2 diabetes and CKD
(239). Finally, in the pooled analysis of
13,026 people with type 2 diabetes and
CKD from both FIDELIO-DKD and FIGARO-
DKD, the HR for the composite of cardio-
vascular death, nonfatal MI, nonfatal
stroke, or hospitalization for heart failure
as well as a composite of kidney failure, a
sustained $57% decrease in eGFR from
baseline over $4 weeks, or renal death
were 0.86 and 0.77, respectively (241).
These collective studies indicate that ﬁ-
nerenone improves cardiovascular and
renal outcomes in people with type 2
Figure 10.3—Approach to risk reduction with sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor or glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist therapy in con-
junction with other traditional, guideline-based preventive medical therapies for blood pressure, lipids, and glycemia and antiplatelet therapy. Re-
printed with permission from Das et al. (309).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S209
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

diabetes. Therefore, in people with type 2
diabetes and CKD with albuminuria
treated with maximum tolerated doses
of ACE inhibitor or ARB, addition of ﬁner-
enone should be considered to improve
cardiovascular outcomes and reduce the
risk of CKD progression.
Clinical Approach
As has been carefully outlined in Fig. 9.3
in Section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches
to Glycemic Treatment,” people with
type 2 diabetes with or at high risk for
ASCVD, heart failure, or CKD should be
treated with a cardioprotective SGLT2 in-
hibitor and/or GLP-1 receptor agonist as
part of the comprehensive approach to
cardiovascular and kidney risk reduction.
Importantly, these agents should be in-
cluded in the plan of care irrespective of
the need for additional glucose lowering
and irrespective of metformin use. Such
an approach has also been described
in the ADA-endorsed American College
of Cardiology “2020 Expert Consensus
Decision Pathway on Novel Therapies
for Cardiovascular Risk Reduction in
Patients With Type 2 Diabetes” (309).
Figure 10.3, reproduced from that deci-
sion pathway, outlines the approach to
risk reduction with SGLT2 inhibitor or
GLP-1 receptor agonist therapy in con-
junction with other traditional, guideli-
ne-based preventive medical therapies
for blood pressure, lipids, and glycemia
and antiplatelet therapy.
Adoption of these agents should be
reasonably straightforward in people
with established cardiovascular or kid-
ney disease who are later diagnosed
with diabetes, as the cardioprotective
agents can be used from the outset of di-
abetes management. On the other hand,
incorporation of SGLT2 inhibitor or GLP-1
receptor agonist therapy in the care of
individuals with more long-standing dia-
betes may be more challenging, particu-
larly if individuals are using an already
complex glucose-lowering plan. In such
individuals, SGLT2 inhibitor or GLP-1
receptor agonist therapy may need to
replace some or all of their existing medi-
cations to minimize risks of hypoglycemia
and adverse side effects and potentially
to minimize medication costs. Close col-
laboration between primary and specialty
care professionals can help to facilitate
these transitions in clinical care and, in
turn, improve outcomes for high-risk
people with type 2 diabetes.
References
1. Parker ED, Lin J, Mahoney T, et al. Economic
costs of diabetes in the U.S. in 2022. Diabetes
Care 1 November 2023 [Epub ahead of print].
DOI: 10.2337/dci23-0085
2. Gæde P, Oellgaard J, Carstensen B, et al.Years
of life gained by multifactorial intervention in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and micro-
albuminuria: 21 years follow-up on the Steno-2
randomised trial. Diabetologia 2016;59:2298–
2307
3. Gaede P, Lund-Andersen H, Parving HH,
Pedersen O. Effect of a multifactorial inter-
vention on mortality in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J
Med 2008;358:580–591
4. Khunti K, Kosiborod M, Ray KK. Legacy
beneﬁts of blood glucose, blood pressure and
lipid control in individuals with diabetes and
cardiovascular disease: time to overcome multi-
factorial therapeutic inertia? Diabetes Obes
Metab 2018;20:1337–1341
5. Ali MK, Bullard KM, Saaddine JB, Cowie CC,
Imperatore G, Gregg EW. Achievement of goals in
U.S. diabetes care, 1999-2010. N Engl J Med
2013;368:1613–1624
6. Buse JB, Ginsberg HN, Bakris GL, et al.;
American Heart Association; American Diabetes
Association. Primary prevention of cardiovascular
diseases in people with diabetes mellitus: a
scientiﬁc statement from the American Heart
Association and the American Diabetes Associ-
ation. Diabetes Care 2007;30:162–172
7. Pop-Busui R, Januzzi JL, Bruemmer D, et al.
Heart failure: An underappreciated complication
of diabetes. A consensus report of the american
diabetes association. Diabetes Care 2022;45:
1670–1690
8. Cavender MA, Steg PG, Smith SC Jr, et al.;
REACH Registry Investigators. Impact of diabetes
mellitus on hospitalization for heart failure,
cardiovascular events, and death: outcomes at
4 years from the Reduction of Atherothrombosis
for Continued Health (REACH) Registry. Cir-
culation 2015;132:923–931
9. McAllister DA, Read SH, Kerssens J, et al.
Incidence of hospitalization for heart failure and
case-fatality among 3.25 million people with and
without diabetes mellitus. Circulation 2018;138:
2774–2786
10. Lam CSP,Voors AA, de Boer RA, Solomon SD,
van Veldhuisen DJ. Heart failure with preserved
ejection fraction: from mechanisms to therapies.
Eur Heart J 2018;39:2780–2792
11. Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, et al.;
EMPA-REG OUTCOME Investigators. Empagli-
ﬂozin, cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality
in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2015;373:
2117–2128
12. Neal B, Perkovic V, Mahaffey KW, et al.;
CANVAS Program Collaborative Group. Canagli-
ﬂozin and cardiovascular and renal events in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;377:644–657
13. Fitchett D, Butler J, van de Borne P, et al.;
EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial investigators. Effects
of empagliﬂozin on risk for cardiovascular death
and heart failure hospitalization across the
spectrum of heart failure risk in the EMPA-REG
OUTCOME trial. Eur Heart J 2018;39:363–370
14. McMurray JJV, Solomon SD, Inzucchi SE,
et al.; DAPA-HF Trial Committees
and In-
vestigators. Dapagliﬂozin in patients with heart
failure and reduced ejection fraction. N Engl J
Med 2019;381:1995–2008
15. Arnott C, Li Q, Kang A, et al. Sodium-glucose
cotransporter 2 inhibition for the prevention of
cardiovascular events in patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Am Heart Assoc 2020;9:e014908
16. Lloyd-Jones DM, Braun LT, Ndumele CE,
et al. Use of risk assessment tools to guide
decision-making in the primary prevention of
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: a special
report from the American Heart Association
and American College of Cardiology. Circulation
2019;139:e1162–e1177
17. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al.
2017
ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/
ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the pre-
vention, detection, evaluation, and management
of high blood pressure in adults: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice
Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol 2018;71:e127–e248
18. de Boer IH, Bangalore S, Benetos A, et al.
Diabetes and hypertension: a position statement
by the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes
Care 2017;40:1273–1284
19. Unger T, Borghi C, Charchar F, et al. 2020
International Society of Hypertension global
hypertension practice guidelines. Hypertension
2020;75:1334–1357
20. Williams B, Mancia G, Spiering W, et al.; ESC
Scientiﬁc
Document
Group.
2018
ESC/ESH
guidelines for
the management
of arterial
hypertension. Eur Heart J 2018;39:3021–3104
21. Ishigami J, Charleston J, Miller ER 3rd,
Matsushita K, Appel LJ, Brady TM. Effects of cuff
size on the accuracy of blood pressure readings:
the Cuff(SZ) randomized crossover trial. JAMA
Intern Med 2023;183:1061–1068
22. Bobrie G, Genes N, Vaur L, et al. Is “isolated
home” hypertension as opposed to “isolated
ofﬁce” hypertension a sign of greater cardio-
vascular
risk?
Arch
Intern
Med
2001;161:
2205–2211
23. Sega R, Facchetti R, Bombelli M, et al.
Prognostic value of ambulatory and home blood
pressures compared with ofﬁce blood pressure in
the general population: follow-up results from
the
Pressioni
Arteriose
Monitorate
e
Loro
Associazioni (PAMELA) study. Circulation 2005;
111:1777–1783
24. Omboni S, Gazzola T, Carabelli G, Parati G.
Clinical usefulness and cost effectiveness of
home blood pressure telemonitoring: meta-
analysis of randomized controlled studies. J
Hypertens 2013;31:455–467; discussion 467–468
25. Emdin CA, Rahimi K, Neal B, Callender T,
Perkovic V, Patel A. Blood pressure lowering in
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. JAMA 2015;313:603–615
26. Arguedas JA, Leiva V, Wright JM. Blood
pressure targets for hypertension in people with
diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2013;10:CD008277
27. Ettehad D, Emdin CA, Kiran A, et al. Blood
pressure lowering for prevention of cardio-
vascular disease and death: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Lancet 2016;387:957–967
S210
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

28. Brunstr€om M, Carlberg B. Effect of anti-
hypertensive treatment at different blood
pressure levels in patients with diabetes mellitus:
systematic review and meta-analyses. BMJ 2016;
352:i717
29. Bangalore S, Kumar S, Lobach I, Messerli FH.
Blood pressure targets in subjects with type 2
diabetes mellitus/impaired fasting glucose: ob-
servations from traditional and Bayesian random-
effects meta-analyses of randomized trials. Circulation
2011;123:2799–2810
30. Thomopoulos C, Parati G, Zanchetti A.
Effects of blood-pressure-lowering treatment on
outcome incidence in hypertension: 10 - Should
blood pressure management differ in hypertensive
patients with and without diabetes mellitus?
Overview and meta-analyses of randomized trials.
J Hypertens 2017;35:922–944
31. Xie X, Atkins E, Lv J, et al. Effects of intensive
blood pressure lowering on cardiovascular and
renal outcomes: updated systematic review and
meta-analysis. Lancet 2016;387:435–443
32. Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD, Whelton PK,
et al.; SPRINT Research Group. A randomized trial
of intensive versus standard blood-pressure
control. N Engl J Med 2015;373:2103–2116
33. Zhang W, Zhang S, Deng Y, et al.; STEP Study
Group.Trial of intensive blood-pressure control in
older patients with hypertension. N Engl J Med
2021;385:1268–1279
34. Cushman WC, Evans GW, Byington RP, et al.;
ACCORD Study Group. Effects of intensive blood-
pressure control in type 2 diabetes mellitus. N
Engl J Med 2010;362:1575–1585
35. Patel A, MacMahon S, Chalmers J, et al.;
ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Effects of a ﬁxed
combination of perindopril and indapamide on
macrovascular and microvascular outcomes in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (the
ADVANCE trial): a randomised controlled trial.
Lancet 2007;370:829–840
36. Hansson L, Zanchetti A, Carruthers SG, et al.;
HOT Study Group. Effects of intensive blood-
pressure
lowering and
low-dose aspirin
in
patients with hypertension: principal results of
the Hypertension Optimal Treatment (HOT)
randomised trial. Lancet 1998;351:1755–1762
37. Reboldi G, Gentile G, Angeli F, Ambrosio G,
Mancia G,Verdecchia P. Effects of intensive blood
pressure reduction on myocardial infarction and
stroke in diabetes: a meta-analysis in 73,913
patients. J Hypertens 2011;29:1253–1269
38. de Boer IH, Bakris G, Cannon CP. Indi-
vidualizing blood pressure targets for people with
diabetes and hypertension: comparing the ADA
and the ACC/AHA recommendations. JAMA 2018;
319:1319–1320
39. Basu S, Sussman JB, Rigdon J, Steimle L,
Denton BT, Hayward RA. Beneﬁt and harm of
intensive blood pressure treatment: derivation
and validation of risk models using data from the
SPRINT and ACCORD trials. PLoS Med 2017;14:
e1002410
40. Phillips RA, Xu J, Peterson LE, Arnold RM,
Diamond JA, Schussheim AE. Impact of cardio-
vascular risk on the relative beneﬁt and harm of
intensive treatment of hypertension. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2018;71:1601–1610
41. Blood Pressure Lowering Treatment Trialists’
Collaboration. Blood pressure-lowering treat-
ment based on cardiovascular risk: a meta-
analysis of individual patient data. Lancet 2014;
384:591–598
42. Sink KM, Evans GW, Shorr RI, et al. Syncope,
hypotension, and falls in the treatment of
hypertension:
results
from
the
randomized
clinical Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial.
J Am Geriatr Soc 2018;66:679–686
43. Beddhu S, Greene T, Boucher R, et al.
Intensive systolic blood pressure control and
incident chronic kidney disease in people with
and without diabetes mellitus: secondary analyses
of two randomised controlled trials. Lancet Dia-
betes Endocrinol 2018;6:555–563
44. Ilkun OL, Greene T, Cheung AK, et al. The
inﬂuence of baseline diastolic blood pressure on
the effects of intensive blood pressure lowering
on cardiovascular outcomes and all-cause mortality
in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2020;43:1878–
1884
45. Abalos E, Duley L, Steyn DW, Gialdini C.
Antihypertensive drug therapy for mild to moderate
hypertension during pregnancy. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2018;10:CD002252
46. Magee LA, von Dadelszen P, Rey E, et al.
Less-tight versus tight control of hypertension in
pregnancy. N Engl J Med 2015;372:407–417
47. Brown MA, Magee LA, Kenny LC, et al.;
International Society for the Study of Hyper-
tension
in
Pregnancy
(ISSHP).
Hypertensive
disorders of pregnancy: ISSHP classiﬁcation,
diagnosis, and management recommendations for
international practice. Hypertension 2018;72:24–43
48. Tita AT, Szychowski JM, Boggess K, et al.;
Chronic Hypertension and Pregnancy (CHAP) Trial
Consortium. Treatment for mild chronic hyper-
tension during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 2022;
386:1781–1792
49. American
College
of
Obstetricians
and
Gynecologists, Task Force on Hypertension in
Pregnancy. Hypertension in pregnancy: report of
the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists’ Task Force on Hypertension in
Pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2013;122:1122–1131
50. Al-Balas M, Bozzo P, Einarson A. Use of
diuretics during pregnancy. Can Fam Physician
2009;55:44–45
51. Irgens HU, Reisaeter L, Irgens LM, Lie RT.
Long term mortality of mothers and fathers after
pre-eclampsia: population based cohort study.
BMJ 2001;323:1213–1217
52. Sacks FM, Svetkey LP, Vollmer WM, et al.;
DASH-Sodium Collaborative Research Group.
Effects on blood pressure of reduced dietary
sodium and the Dietary Approaches to Stop
Hypertension (DASH) diet. N Engl J Med 2001;
344:3–10
53. James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, et al. 2014
evidence-based guideline for the management of
high blood pressure in adults: report from the
panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint
National Committee (JNC 8). JAMA 2014;311:
507–520
54. Mao Y, Lin W, Wen J, Chen G. Impact and
efﬁcacy of mobile health intervention in the
management of diabetes and hypertension: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Open
Diabetes Res Care 2020;8:e001225
55. Stogios N, Kaur B, Huszti E, Vasanthan J,
Nolan RP. Advancing digital health interventions
as a clinically applied science for blood pressure
reduction:
a
systematic
review
and
meta-
analysis. Can J Cardiol 2020;36:764–774
56. Bakris GL; Study of Hypertension and the
Efﬁcacy of Lotrel in Diabetes (SHIELD) Investi-
gators. Achieving goal blood pressure in patients
with type 2 diabetes: conventional versus ﬁxed-
dose combination approaches. J Clin Hypertens
(Greenwich) 2003;5:202–209
57. Feldman RD, Zou GY,Vandervoort MK,Wong
CJ, Nelson SA, Feagan BG. A simpliﬁed approach
to the treatment of uncomplicated hypertension:
a cluster randomized, controlled trial. Hypertension
2009;53:646–653
58. Webster R, Salam A, de Silva HA, et al.;
TRIUMPH Study Group. Fixed low-dose triple
combination
antihypertensive
medication
vs
usual care for blood pressure control in patients
with mild to moderate hypertension in Sri Lanka:
a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2018;320:
566–579
59. Bangalore S, Kamalakkannan G, Parkar S,
Messerli FH. Fixed-dose combinations improve
medication compliance: a meta-analysis. Am J
Med 2007;120:713–719
60. Catala-Lopez F, Macıas Saint-Gerons D,
Gonzalez-Bermejo D, et al. Cardiovascular and
renal outcomes of renin-angiotensin system
blockade in adult patients with diabetes mellitus:
a systematic review with network meta-analyses.
PLoS Med 2016;13:e1001971
61. Palmer SC, Mavridis D, Navarese E, et al.
Comparative
efﬁcacy
and
safety
of
blood
pressure-lowering agents in adults with diabetes
and kidney disease: a network meta-analysis.
Lancet 2015;385:2047–2056
62. Barzilay JI, Davis BR, Bettencourt J, et al.;
ALLHAT Collaborative Research Group. Cardio-
vascular outcomes using doxazosin vs. chlor-
thalidone for the treatment of hypertension in
older adults with and without glucose disorders:
a report from the ALLHAT study. J Clin Hypertens
(Greenwich) 2004;6:116–125
63. Weber MA, Bakris GL, Jamerson K, et al.;
ACCOMPLISH Investigators. Cardiovascular events
during differing hypertension therapies in patients
with diabetes. J Am Coll Cardiol 2010;56:77–85
64. Heart
Outcomes
Prevention
Evaluation
Study Investigators. Effects of ramipril on cardio-
vascular and microvascular outcomes in people
with diabetes mellitus: results of the HOPE study
and MICRO-HOPE substudy. Lancet 2000;355:
253–259
65. Arnold SV, Bhatt DL, Barsness GW, et al.;
American Heart Association Council on Lifestyle
and Cardiometabolic Health and Council on
Clinical Cardiology. Clinical management of stable
coronary artery disease in patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus: a scientiﬁc statement from the
American Heart Association. Circulation 2020;
141:e779–e806
66. Yusuf
S,
Teo
K,
Anderson
C,
et
al.;
Telmisartan Randomised AssessmeNt Study in
ACE iNtolerant subjects with cardiovascular
Disease (TRANSCEND) Investigators. Effects of
the angiotensin-receptor blocker telmisartan on
cardiovascular
events
in
high-risk
patients
intolerant
to
angiotensin-converting
enzyme
inhibitors: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet
2008;372:1174–1183
67. Qiao Y, Shin JI, Chen TK, et al. Association
between
renin-angiotensin
system
blockade
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S211
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

discontinuation and all-cause mortality among
persons with low estimated glomerular ﬁltration
rate. JAMA Intern Med 2020;180:718–726
68. Bangalore S, Fakheri R, Toklu B, Messerli
FH. Diabetes mellitus as a compelling indication
for use of renin angiotensin system blockers:
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
trials. BMJ 2016;352:i438
69. Carlberg B, Samuelsson O, Lindholm LH.
Atenolol in hypertension: is it a wise choice?
Lancet 2004;364:1684–1689
70. Murphy SP, Ibrahim NE, Januzzi JL Jr. Heart
failure with reduced ejection fraction: a review.
JAMA 2020;324:488–504
71. Yusuf S, Teo KK, Pogue J, et al.; ONTARGET
Investigators. Telmisartan, ramipril, or both in
patients at high risk for vascular events. N Engl J
Med 2008;358:1547–1559
72. Fried LF, Emanuele N, Zhang JH, et al.; VA
NEPHRON-D Investigators. Combined angiotensin
inhibition
for
the
treatment
of
diabetic
nephropathy. N Engl J Med 2013;369:1892–1903
73. Makani H, Bangalore S, Desouza KA, Shah A,
Messerli FH. Efﬁcacy and safety of dual blockade
of the renin-angiotensin system: meta-analysis of
randomised trials. BMJ 2013;346:f360
74. Zhao P, Xu P, Wan C,Wang Z. Evening versus
morning
dosing
regimen
drug
therapy
for
hypertension. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011;
2011:CD004184
75. Hermida RC, Ayala DE, Mojon A, Fernandez
JR. Inﬂuence of time of day of blood pressure-
lowering treatment on cardiovascular risk in
hypertensive patients with type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes Care 2011;34:1270–1276
76. Rahman M, Greene T, Phillips RA, et al. A
trial of 2 strategies to reduce nocturnal blood
pressure in blacks with chronic kidney disease.
Hypertension 2013;61:82–88
77. Nilsson E, Gasparini A, €Arnl€ov J, et al.
Incidence and determinants of hyperkalemia and
hypokalemia in a large healthcare system. Int J
Cardiol 2017;245:277–284
78. Bandak G, Sang Y, Gasparini A, et al.
Hyperkalemia after initiating renin-angiotensin
system
blockade:
the
Stockholm
Creatinine
Measurements (SCREAM) project. J Am Heart
Assoc 2017;6:e005428
79. Hughes-Austin JM, Rifkin DE, Beben T, et al.
The relation of serum potassium concentration
with cardiovascular events and mortality in
community-living individuals. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2017;12:245–252
80. James MT, Grams ME, Woodward M, et al.;
CKD Prognosis Consortium. A meta-analysis of
the association of estimated GFR, albuminuria,
diabetes mellitus, and hypertension with acute
kidney injury. Am J Kidney Dis 2015;66:602–612
81. Williams B, MacDonald TM, Morant S, et al.;
British Hypertension Society’s PATHWAY Studies
Group. Spironolactone versus placebo, bisoprolol,
and doxazosin to determine the optimal treatment
for drug-resistant hypertension (PATHWAY-2): a
randomised, double-blind, crossover trial. Lancet
2015;386:2059–2068
82. Sato A, Hayashi K, Naruse M, Saruta T.
Effectiveness of aldosterone blockade in patients
with diabetic nephropathy. Hypertension 2003;
41:64–68
83. Mehdi UF, Adams-Huet B, Raskin P, Vega GL,
Toto
RD.
Addition
of
angiotensin
receptor
blockade or mineralocorticoid antagonism to
maximal angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition
in diabetic nephropathy. J Am Soc Nephrol 2009;
20:2641–2650
84. Bakris GL, Agarwal R, Chan JC, et al.;
Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonist Tolerability
Study–Diabetic Nephropathy (ARTS-DN) Study
Group. Effect of ﬁnerenone on albuminuria in
patients with diabetic nephropathy: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA 2015;314:884–894
85. Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, et al.;
American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines;
Obesity Society. 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline for
the management of overweight and obesity in
adults: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American
Heart
Association
Task
Force on Practice Guidelines and The Obesity
Society. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;63(25 Pt B):
2985–3023
86. Eckel RH, Jakicic JM, Ard JD, et al.; American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Associ-
ation Task Force on Practice Guidelines. 2013
AHA/ACC guideline on lifestyle management to
reduce cardiovascular risk: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.
Circulation 2014;129(Suppl. 2):S76–S99
87. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al.
2019 ACC/AHA guideline on the primary pre-
vention of cardiovascular disease: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice
Guidelines. Circulation 2019;140:e596–e646
88. Jia X, Al Rifai M, Ramsey DJ, et al.
Association between lipid testing and statin
adherence in the Veterans Affairs health system.
Am J Med 2019;132:e693–e700
89. Rana JS, Virani SS, Moffet HH, et al.
Association of low-density lipoprotein testing
after an atherosclerotic cardiovascular event with
subsequent statin adherence and intensiﬁcation.
Am J Med 2022;135:603–606
90. Tran C, Vo V, Taylor P, Koehn DA, Virani SS,
Dixon DL. Adherence to lipid monitoring and its
impact on treat intensiﬁcation of LDL-C lowering
therapies at an urban academic medical center. J
Clin Lipidol 2022;16:491–497
91. Chasman DI, Posada D, Subrahmanyan L,
Cook NR, Stanton VP Jr, Ridker PM. Pharma-
cogenetic study of statin therapy and cholesterol
reduction. JAMA 2004;291:2821–2827
92. Meek C, Wierzbicki AS, Jewkes C, et al. Daily
and intermittent rosuvastatin 5mg therapy in
statin intolerant patients: an observational study.
Curr Med Res Opin 2012;28:371–378
93. Mihaylova B, Emberson J, Blackwell L, et al.;
Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collabo-
rators. The effects of lowering LDL cholesterol
with statin therapy in people at low risk of
vascular disease: meta-analysis of individual data
from 27 randomised trials. Lancet 2012;380:
581–590
94. Baigent C, Keech A, Kearney PM, et al.;
Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collabo-
rators. Efﬁcacy and safety of cholesterol-lowering
treatment: prospective meta-analysis of data
from 90,056 participants in 14 randomised trials
of statins. Lancet 2005;366:1267–1278
95. Pyor€al€a
K,
Pedersen
TR,
Kjekshus
J,
Faergeman
O,
Olsson
AG, Thorgeirsson
G.
Cholesterol lowering with simvastatin improves
prognosis of diabetic patients with coronary
heart disease. A subgroup analysis of the Scan-
dinavian Simvastatin Survival Study (4S). Diabetes
Care 1997;20:614–620
96. Collins R, Armitage J, Parish S, Sleigh P; Heart
Protection Study Collaborative Group. MRC/BHF
Heart Protection Study of cholesterol-lowering
with simvastatin in 5963 people with diabetes: a
randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2003;
361:2005–2016
97. Goldberg RB, Mellies MJ, Sacks FM, et al.;
The Care Investigators. Cardiovascular events and
their reduction with pravastatin in diabetic and
glucose-intolerant myocardial infarction survivors
with
average
cholesterol
levels:
subgroup
analyses in the Cholesterol and Recurrent Events
(CARE) trial. Circulation 1998;98:2513–2519
98. Shepherd J, Barter P, Carmena R, et al. Effect
of lowering LDL cholesterol substantially below
currently recommended levels in patients with
coronary heart disease and diabetes: the Treating
to New Targets (TNT) study. Diabetes Care
2006;29:1220–1226
99. Sever PS, Poulter NR, Dahl€of B, et al.
Reduction
in
cardiovascular
events
with
atorvastatin in 2,532 patients with type 2 diabetes:
Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial–Lipid-
Lowering Arm (ASCOT-LLA). Diabetes Care 2005;
28:1151–1157
100. Knopp RH, d’Emden M, Smilde JG, Pocock
SJ. Efﬁcacy and safety of atorvastatin in the
prevention of cardiovascular end points in
subjects with type 2 diabetes: the atorvastatin
study for prevention of coronary heart disease
endpoints in non-insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus
(ASPEN).
Diabetes
Care
2006;29:
1478–1485
101. Colhoun HM, Betteridge DJ, Durrington PN,
et al.; CARDS Investigators. Primary prevention of
cardiovascular disease with atorvastatin in type 2
diabetes
in
the
Collaborative
Atorvastatin
Diabetes Study (CARDS): multicentre randomised
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2004;364:685–696
102. Kearney PM, Blackwell L, Collins R, et al.;
Cholesterol
Treatment
Trialists’
(CTT)
Colla-
borators. Efﬁcacy of cholesterol-lowering therapy
in 18,686 people with diabetes in 14 randomised
trials of statins: a meta-analysis. Lancet 2008;
371:117–125
103. Taylor F, Huffman MD, Macedo AF, et al.
Statins for the primary prevention of cardio-
vascular disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2013;2013:CD004816
104. Carter AA, Gomes T, Camacho X, Juurlink
DN, Shah BR, Mamdani MM. Risk of incident
diabetes among patients treated with statins:
population based study. BMJ 2013;346:f2610
105. Jellinger PS, Handelsman Y, Rosenblit PD,
et al. American Association of Clinical Endo-
crinologists and American College of Endocri-
nology guidelines for management of dyslipidemia
and prevention of cardiovascular disease. Endocr
Pract 2017;23(Suppl. 2):1–87
106. Goldberg RB, Stone NJ, Grundy SM. The
2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/
AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guidelines on the
management of blood cholesterol in diabetes.
Diabetes Care 2020;43:1673–1678
107. Mach F, Baigent C, Catapano AL, et al.; ESC
Scientiﬁc
Document
Group.
2019
ESC/EAS
guidelines for the management of dyslipidaemias:
lipid modiﬁcation to reduce cardiovascular risk.
Eur Heart J 2020;41:111–188
S212
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

108. Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018
AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/
APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the manage-
ment of blood cholesterol: executive summary: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association task force on clinical
practice guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol 2019;
73:3168–3209
109. Sabatine MS, Giugliano RP, Wiviott SD,
et al.; Open-Label Study of Long-Term Evaluation
against LDL Cholesterol (OSLER) Investigators.
Efﬁcacy and safety of evolocumab in reducing
lipids and cardiovascular events. N Engl J Med
2015;372:1500–1509
110. Robinson JG, Farnier M, Krempf M, et al.;
ODYSSEY LONG TERM Investigators. Efﬁcacy and
safety of alirocumab in reducing lipids and
cardiovascular events. N Engl J Med 2015;
372:1489–1499
111. Khan SU, Yedlapati SH, Lone AN, et al.
PCSK9 inhibitors and ezetimibe with or without
statin therapy for cardiovascular risk reduction: a
systematic review and network meta-analysis.
BMJ 2022;377:e069116
112. Cannon CP, Blazing MA, Giugliano RP, et al.;
IMPROVE-IT Investigators. Ezetimibe added to
statin therapy after acute coronary syndromes. N
Engl J Med 2015;372:2387–2397
113. de Ferranti SD, de Boer IH, Fonseca V, et al.
Type 1 diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular
disease: a scientiﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association and American Diabetes Asso-
ciation. Diabetes Care 2014;37:2843–2863
114. Cannon CP, Braunwald E, McCabe CH,
et al.; Pravastatin or Atorvastatin Evaluation and
Infection Therapy-Thrombolysis in Myocardial
Infarction
22
Investigators.
Intensive versus
moderate lipid lowering with statins after acute
coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med 2004;350:
1495–1504
115. Sabatine MS, Giugliano RP, Keech AC, et al.;
FOURIER Steering Committee and Investigators.
Evolocumab and clinical outcomes in patients
with cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med
2017;376:1713–1722
116. Giugliano RP, Cannon CP, Blazing MA, et al.;
IMPROVE-IT (Improved Reduction of Outcomes:
Vytorin Efﬁcacy International Trial) Investigators.
Beneﬁt of adding ezetimibe to statin therapy on
cardiovascular outcomes and safety in patients
with versus without diabetes mellitus: results
from IMPROVE-IT (Improved Reduction of Out-
comes: Vytorin Efﬁcacy International Trial). Circu-
lation 2018;137:1571–1582
117. Schwartz GG, Steg PG, Szarek M, et al.;
ODYSSEY OUTCOMES Committees and Investi-
gators. Alirocumab and cardiovascular outcomes
after acute coronary syndrome. N Engl J Med
2018;379:2097–2107
118. Ray KK, Colhoun HM, Szarek M, et al.;
ODYSSEY OUTCOMES Committees and Investi-
gators. Effects of alirocumab on cardiovascular
and metabolic outcomes after acute coronary
syndrome in patients with or without diabetes: a
prespeciﬁed analysis of the ODYSSEY OUTCOMES
randomised controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol 2019;7:618–628
119. Sabatine MS, Leiter LA, Wiviott SD, et al.
Cardiovascular safety and efﬁcacy of the PCSK9
inhibitor evolocumab in patients with and
without diabetes and the effect of evolocumab
on glycaemia and risk of new-onset diabetes: a
prespeciﬁed analysis of the FOURIER randomised
controlled
trial.
Lancet
Diabetes
Endocrinol
2017;5:941–950
120. Moriarty PM, Jacobson TA, Bruckert E,
et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of alirocumab, a mono-
clonal antibody to PCSK9, in statin-intolerant
patients: design and rationale of ODYSSEY
ALTERNATIVE, a randomized phase 3 trial. J Clin
Lipidol 2014;8:554–561
121. Zhang XL, Zhu QQ, Zhu L, et al. Safety and
efﬁcacy of anti-PCSK9 antibodies: a meta-analysis
of 25 randomized, controlled trials. BMC Med
2015;13:123
122. Giugliano RP, Pedersen TR, Saver JL, et al.;
FOURIER Investigators. Stroke prevention with
the PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilisin-kexin
type 9) inhibitor evolocumab added to statin in
high-risk patients with stable atherosclerosis.
Stroke 2020;51:1546–1554
123. Ray KK,Wright RS, Kallend D, et al.; ORION-
10 and ORION-11 Investigators. Two phase 3
trials of inclisiran in patients with elevated LDL
cholesterol. N Engl J Med 2020;382:1507–1519
124. University of Oxford. A randomized trial
assessing the effects of inclisiran on clinical
outcomes among people with cardiovascular
disease (ORION-4). In: ClinicalTrials.gov. Bethesda,
MD, National Library of Medicine. NLM Identiﬁer:
NCT03705234.
Accessed
10
October
2023.
Available from https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT03705234
125. Cheeley MK, Saseen JJ, Agarwala A, et al.
NLA scientiﬁc statement on statin intolerance: a
new deﬁnition and key considerations for ASCVD
risk reduction in the statin intolerant patient. J
Clin Lipidol 2022;16:361–375
126. Moriarty PM, Thompson PD, Cannon CP,
et al.; ODYSSEY ALTERNATIVE Investigators.
Efﬁcacy and safety of alirocumab vs ezetimibe
in
statin-intolerant
patients,
with
a
statin
rechallenge arm: the ODYSSEY ALTERNATIVE
randomized trial. J Clin Lipidol 2015;9:758–769
127. Moriarty PM, Thompson PD, Cannon CP,
et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of alirocumab in statin-
intolerant patients over 3 years: open-label
treatment period of the ODYSSEY ALTERNATIVE
trial. J Clin Lipidol 2020;14:88–97.e2
128. Sullivan D, Olsson AG, Scott R, et al. Effect
of a monoclonal antibody to PCSK9 on low-
density lipoprotein cholesterol levels in statin-
intolerant patients: the GAUSS randomized trial.
JAMA 2012;308:2497–2506
129. Stroes E, Colquhoun D, Sullivan D, et al.;
GAUSS-2
Investigators.
Anti-PCSK9
antibody
effectively lowers cholesterol in patients with
statin intolerance: the GAUSS-2 randomized,
placebo-controlled phase 3
clinical
trial
of
evolocumab. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;63:2541–
2548
130. Cho L, Dent R, Stroes ESG, et al. Persistent
safety and efﬁcacy of evolocumab in patients
with statin intolerance: a subset analysis of the
OSLER open-label extension studies. Cardiovasc
Drugs Ther 2018;32:365–372
131. Nissen SE, Stroes E, Dent-Acosta RE, et al.;
GAUSS-3 Investigators. Efﬁcacy and tolerability
of evolocumab vs ezetimibe in patients with
muscle-related statin intolerance: the GAUSS-3
randomized
clinical
trial.
JAMA
2016;315:
1580–1590
132. Ray KK, Stoekenbroek RM, Kallend D, et al.
Effect of 1 or 2 doses of inclisiran on low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol levels: one-year follow-up
of the ORION-1 randomized clinical trial. JAMA
Cardiol 2019;4:1067–1075
133. Ray KK, Troquay RPT, Visseren FLJ, et al.
Long-term efﬁcacy and safety of inclisiran in
patients
with
high
cardiovascular
risk
and
elevated LDL cholesterol (ORION-3): results from
the 4-year open-label extension of the ORION-1
trial.
Lancet
Diabetes
Endocrinol
2023;11:
109–119
134. Dai L, Zuo Y, You Q, Zeng H, Cao S. Efﬁcacy
and safety of bempedoic acid in patients with
hypercholesterolemia: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Eur J Prev Cardiol 2021;28:825–833
135. Di Minno A, Lupoli R, Calcaterra I, et al.
Efﬁcacy and safety of bempedoic acid in patients
with hypercholesterolemia: systematic review
and meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. J Am Heart Assoc 2020;9:e016262
136. Nissen SE, Lincoff AM, Brennan D, et al.;
CLEAR Outcomes Investigators. Bempedoic acid
and cardiovascular outcomes in statin-intolerant
patients. N Engl J Med 2023;388:1353–1364
137. Nissen SE, Menon V, Nicholls SJ, et al.
Bempedoic acid for primary prevention of cardio-
vascular events in statin-intolerant patients.
JAMA 2023;330:131–140
138. Berglund L, Brunzell JD, Goldberg AC, et al.;
Endocrine Society. Evaluation and treatment
of hypertriglyceridemia: an Endocrine Society
clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2012;97:2969–2989
139. Bhatt DL, Steg PG, Miller M, et al.; REDUCE-
IT Investigators. Cardiovascular risk reduction
with icosapent ethyl for hypertriglyceridemia. N
Engl J Med 2019;380:11–22
140. Nicholls SJ, Lincoff AM, Garcia M, et al.
Effect of high-dose omega-3 fatty acids vs corn oil
on major adverse cardiovascular events in patients
at high cardiovascular risk: the STRENGTH
randomized
clinical
trial.
JAMA
2020;324:
2268–2280
141. Singh IM, Shishehbor MH, Ansell BJ. High-
density lipoprotein as a therapeutic target: a
systematic review. JAMA 2007;298:786–798
142. Keech A, Simes RJ, Barter P, et al.; FIELD
Study
Investigators.
Effects
of
long-term
fenoﬁbrate therapy on cardiovascular events in
9795 people with type 2 diabetes mellitus (the
FIELD study): randomised controlled trial. Lancet
2005;366:1849–1861
143. Jones PH, Davidson MH. Reporting rate of
rhabdomyolysis with fenoﬁbrate 1 statin versus
gemﬁbrozil 1 any statin. Am J Cardiol 2005;95:
120–122
144. Ginsberg HN, Elam MB, Lovato LC, et al.;
ACCORD Study Group. Effects of combination
lipid therapy in type 2 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J
Med 2010;362:1563–1574
145. Boden WE, Probstﬁeld JL, Anderson T,
et al.; AIM-HIGH Investigators. Niacin in patients
with
low
HDL
cholesterol
levels
receiving
intensive statin therapy. N Engl J Med 2011;
365:2255–2267
146. Landray MJ, Haynes R, Hopewell JC, et al.;
HPS2-THRIVE Collaborative Group. Effects of
extended-release niacin with laropiprant in high-
risk patients. N Engl J Med 2014;371:203–212
147. Rajpathak SN, Kumbhani DJ, Crandall J,
Barzilai N, Alderman M, Ridker PM. Statin
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S213
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

therapy and risk of developing type 2 diabetes: a
meta-analysis. Diabetes Care 2009;32:1924–1929
148. Sattar N, Preiss D, Murray HM, et al. Statins
and risk of incident diabetes: a collaborative
meta-analysis of randomised statin trials. Lancet
2010;375:735–742
149. Ridker PM, Pradhan A, MacFadyen JG,
Libby P, Glynn RJ. Cardiovascular beneﬁts and
diabetes risks of statin therapy in primary
prevention: an analysis from the JUPITER trial.
Lancet 2012;380:565–571
150. Mach F, Ray KK, Wiklund O, et al.;
European
Atherosclerosis
Society
Consensus
Panel. Adverse effects of statin therapy: per-
ception vs. the evidence—focus on glucose
homeostasis, cognitive, renal and hepatic function,
haemorrhagic stroke and cataract. Eur Heart J
2018;39:2526–2539
151. Heart
Protection
Study
Collaborative
Group. MRC/BHF Heart Protection Study of
cholesterol lowering with simvastatin in 20,536
high-risk individuals: a randomised placebo-
controlled trial. Lancet 2002;360:7–22
152. Shepherd J, Blauw GJ, Murphy MB, et al.;
PROSPER Study Group. PROspective Study of
Pravastatin in the Elderly at Risk. Pravastatin in
elderly individuals at risk of vascular disease
(PROSPER): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet
2002;360:1623–1630
153. Trompet S, van Vliet P, de Craen AJ, et al.
Pravastatin and cognitive function in the elderly.
Results of the PROSPER study. J Neurol 2010;
257:85–90
154. Yusuf S, Bosch J, Dagenais G, et al.; HOPE-3
Investigators. Cholesterol lowering in intermediate-
risk persons without cardiovascular disease. N Engl
J Med 2016;374:2021–2031
155. Giugliano RP, Mach F, Zavitz K, et al.;
EBBINGHAUS Investigators. Cognitive function in
a randomized trial of evolocumab. N Engl J Med
2017;377:633–643
156. Richardson K, Schoen M, French B, et al.
Statins and cognitive function: a systematic
review. Ann Intern Med 2013;159:688–697
157. Perk J, De Backer G, Gohlke H, et al.;
European Association for Cardiovascular Pre-
vention & Rehabilitation (EACPR); ESC Committee
for Practice Guidelines (CPG). European guide-
lines on cardiovascular disease prevention in
clinical practice (version 2012). The Fifth Joint
Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology
and Other Societies on Cardiovascular Disease
Prevention in Clinical Practice (constituted by
representatives of nine societies and by invited
experts). Eur Heart J 2012;33:1635–1701
158. Belch J, MacCuish A, Campbell I, et al.;
Prevention of Progression of Arterial Disease and
Diabetes Study Group; Diabetes Registry Group;
Royal
College
of
Physicians
Edinburgh. The
Prevention of Progression of Arterial Disease and
Diabetes (POPADAD) trial: factorial randomised
placebo controlled trial of aspirin and antioxidants
in patients with diabetes and asymptomatic
peripheral arterial disease. BMJ 2008;337:a1840
159. Zhang C, Sun A, Zhang P, et al. Aspirin for
primary prevention of cardiovascular events in
patients with diabetes: a meta-analysis. Diabetes
Res Clin Pract 2010;87:211–218
160. De Berardis G, Sacco M, Strippoli GF, et al.
Aspirin for primary prevention of cardiovascular
events in people with diabetes: meta-analysis
of randomised controlled trials. BMJ 2009;
339:b4531
161. Baigent C, Blackwell L, Collins R, et al.;
Antithrombotic
Trialists’
(ATT)
Collaboration.
Aspirin in the primary and secondary prevention
of vascular disease: collaborative meta-analysis
of individual participant data from randomised
trials. Lancet 2009;373:1849–1860
162. Bowman L, Mafham M, Wallendszus K,
et al.; ASCEND Study Collaborative Group. Effects
of aspirin for primary prevention in persons with
diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med 2018;379:
1529–1539
163. Gaziano JM, Brotons C, Coppolecchia R,
et al.; ARRIVE Executive Committee. Use of
aspirin to reduce risk of initial vascular events in
patients at moderate risk of cardiovascular
disease (ARRIVE): a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2018;392:1036–1046
164. McNeil JJ, Wolfe R, Woods RL, et al.;
ASPREE Investigator Group. Effect of aspirin on
cardiovascular events and bleeding in the healthy
elderly. N Engl J Med 2018;379:1509–1518
165. Pignone M, Earnshaw S, Tice JA, Pletcher
MJ. Aspirin, statins, or both drugs for the primary
prevention of coronary heart disease events in
men: a cost-utility analysis. Ann Intern Med
2006;144:326–336
166. Huxley
RR,
Peters
SA,
Mishra
GD,
Woodward M. Risk of all-cause mortality and
vascular events in women versus men with
type 1 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2015;3:
198–206
167. Peters SA, Huxley RR, Woodward M.
Diabetes as risk factor for incident coronary heart
disease in women compared with men: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of 64
cohorts including 858,507 individuals and 28,203
coronaryevents. Diabetologia 2014;57:1542–1551
168. Kalyani RR, Lazo M, Ouyang P, et al. Sex
differences in diabetes and risk of incident
coronary artery disease in healthy young and
middle-aged adults. Diabetes Care 2014;37:830–838
169. Peters SA, Huxley RR, Woodward M.
Diabetes as a risk factor for stroke in women
compared with men: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of 64 cohorts, including 775,385
individuals and 12,539 strokes. Lancet 2014;
383:1973–1980
170. Miedema MD, Duprez DA, Misialek JR,
et al. Use of coronary artery calcium testing to
guide aspirin utilization for primary prevention:
estimates
from
the
Multi-Ethnic
Study
of
Atherosclerosis. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes
2014;7:453–460
171. Dimitriu-Leen
AC,
Scholte
AJ,
van
Rosendael AR, et al. Value of coronary computed
tomography angiography in tailoring aspirin
therapy for primary prevention of atherosclerotic
events in patients at high risk with diabetes
mellitus. Am J Cardiol 2016;117:887–893
172. Mora S, Ames JM, Manson JE. Low-dose
aspirin in the primary prevention of cardio-
vascular disease: shared decision making in
clinical practice. JAMA 2016;316:709–710
173. Campbell CL, Smyth S, Montalescot G,
Steinhubl SR. Aspirin dose for the prevention of
cardiovascular disease: a systematic review.
JAMA 2007;297:2018–2024
174. Jones WS, Mulder H, Wruck LM, et al.;
ADAPTABLE Team. Comparative effectiveness of
aspirin dosing in cardiovascular disease. N Engl J
Med 2021;384:1981–1990
175. Davı G, Patrono C. Platelet activation and
atherothrombosis. N Engl J Med 2007;357:2482–
2494
176. Larsen SB, Grove EL, Neergaard-Petersen S,
W€urtz M, Hvas AM, Kristensen SD. Determinants
of reduced antiplatelet effect of aspirin in
patients with stable coronary artery disease.
PLoS One 2015;10:e0126767
177. Zaccardi F, Rizzi A, Petrucci G, et al. In vivo
platelet activation and aspirin responsiveness in
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 2016;65:503–509
178. Bethel MA, Harrison P, Sourij H, et al.
Randomized controlled trial comparing impact
on platelet reactivity of twice-daily with once-
daily aspirin in people with type 2 diabetes.
Diabet Med 2016;33:224–230
179. Rothwell PM, Cook NR, Gaziano JM, et al.
Effects of aspirin on risks of vascular events and
cancer according to bodyweight and dose:
analysis
of
individual
patient
data
from
randomised trials. Lancet 2018;392:387–399
180. Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, et al. 2016
ACC/AHA guideline focused update on duration
of dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with
coronary artery disease: a report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Asso-
ciation Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines:
an update of the 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline
for percutaneous coronary intervention, 2011
ACCF/AHA guideline for coronary artery bypass
graft surgery, 2012 ACC/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/
SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and mana-
gement of patients with stable ischemic heart
disease,
2013 ACCF/AHA
guideline
for
the
management
of
ST-elevation
myocardial
infarction, 2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the
management of patients with non-ST-elevation
acute coronary syndromes, and 2014 ACC/AHA
guideline on perioperative cardiovascular eval-
uation and management of patients undergoing
noncardiac surgery.Circulation 2016;134:e123–e155
181. Kleindorfer DO, Towﬁghi A, Chaturvedi S,
et al. 2021 guideline for the prevention of stroke
in patients with stroke and transient ischemic
attack: a guideline from the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke
2021;52:e364–e467
182. Vandvik PO, Lincoff AM, Gore JM, et al.
Primary and secondary prevention of cardio-
vascular disease: Antithrombotic Therapy and
Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American
College
of
Chest
Physicians
evidence-based
clinical practice guidelines. Chest 2012;141:
e637S–e668S
183. Bhatt DL, Bonaca MP, Bansilal S, et al.
Reduction in ischemic events with ticagrelor in
diabetic patients with prior myocardial infarction
in PEGASUS-TIMI 54. J Am Coll Cardiol 2016;
67:2732–2740
184. Steg PG, Bhatt DL, Simon T, et al.; THEMIS
Steering Committee and Investigators. Ticagrelor
in patients with stable coronary disease and
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;381:1309–1320
185. Bhatt DL, Steg PG, Mehta SR, et al.; THEMIS
Steering Committee and Investigators. Ticagrelor
in patients with diabetes and stable coronary
artery
disease
with
a
history
of
previous
percutaneous coronary intervention (THEMIS-
PCI): a phase 3, placebo-controlled, randomised
trial. Lancet 2019;394:1169–1180
S214
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

186. Angiolillo DJ, Baber U, Sartori S, et al.
Ticagrelor with or without aspirin in high-risk
patients
with
diabetes
mellitus
undergoing
percutaneous coronary intervention. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2020;75:2403–2413
187. Wiebe J, Ndrepepa G, Kufner S, et al. Early
aspirin discontinuation after coronary stenting: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Heart
Assoc 2021;10:e018304
188. Bhatt DL, Eikelboom JW, Connolly SJ, et al.;
COMPASS Steering Committee and Investigators.
Role
of combination
antiplatelet and anti-
coagulation therapy in diabetes mellitus and
cardiovascular
disease:
insights
from
the
COMPASS trial. Circulation 2020;141:1841–1854
189. Connolly SJ, Eikelboom JW, Bosch J, et al.;
COMPASS Investigators. Rivaroxaban with or
without aspirin in patients with stable coronary
artery disease: an international, randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet
2018;391:205–218
190. Bonaca MP, Bauersachs RM, Anand SS,
et al. Rivaroxaban in peripheral artery disease
after revascularization. N Engl J Med 2020;
382:1994–2004
191. Bax JJ, Young LH, Frye RL, Bonow RO,
Steinberg HO; ADA. Screening for coronary artery
disease in patients with diabetes. Diabetes Care
2007;30:2729–2736
192. Boden WE, O’Rourke RA, Teo KK, et al.;
COURAGE Trial Research Group. Optimal medical
therapy with or without PCI for stable coronary
disease. N Engl J Med 2007;356:1503–1516
193. Frye RL, August P, Brooks MM, et al.; BARI
2D Study Group. A randomized trial of therapies
for type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease.
N Engl J Med 2009;360:2503–2515
194. Wackers FJ, Chyun DA, Young LH, et al.;
Detection of Ischemia in Asymptomatic Diabetics
(DIAD) Investigators. Resolution of asymptomatic
myocardial ischemia in patients with type 2
diabetes
in
the
Detection
of
Ischemia
in
Asymptomatic Diabetics (DIAD) study. Diabetes
Care 2007;30:2892–2898
195. Elkeles RS, Godsland IF, Feher MD, et al.;
PREDICT Study Group. Coronary calcium mea-
surement improves prediction of cardiovascular
events in asymptomatic patients with type 2
diabetes: the PREDICT study. Eur Heart J 2008;
29:2244–2251
196. Raggi P, Shaw LJ, Berman DS, Callister TQ.
Prognostic value of coronary artery calcium
screening in subjects with and without diabetes. J
Am Coll Cardiol 2004;43:1663–1669
197. Anand DV, Lim E, Hopkins D, et al. Risk
stratiﬁcation in uncomplicated type 2 diabetes:
prospective evaluation of the combined use of
coronary artery calcium imaging and selective
myocardial perfusion scintigraphy. Eur Heart J
2006;27:713–721
198. Young LH, Wackers FJ, Chyun DA, et al.;
DIAD
Investigators.
Cardiac
outcomes
after
screening for asymptomatic coronary artery
disease in patients with type 2 diabetes: the
DIAD study: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA
2009;301:1547–1555
199. Wackers FJ, Young LH, Inzucchi SE, et al.;
Detection of Ischemia in Asymptomatic Diabetics
Investigators. Detection of silent myocardial
ischemia in asymptomatic diabetic subjects: the
DIAD study. Diabetes Care 2004;27:1954–1961
200. Scognamiglio R, Negut C, Ramondo A,
Tiengo A, Avogaro A. Detection of coronary
artery disease in asymptomatic patients with
type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Am Coll Cardiol 2006;
47:65–71
201. Hadamitzky M, Hein F, Meyer T, et al.
Prognostic value of coronary computed tomo-
graphic angiography in diabetic patients without
known coronary artery disease. Diabetes Care
2010;33:1358–1363
202. Choi EK, Chun EJ, Choi SI, et al. Assessment
of subclinical coronary atherosclerosis in asym-
ptomatic patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
with single photon emission computed tomo-
graphy and coronary computed tomography
angiography. Am J Cardiol 2009;104:890–896
203. Malik S, Zhao Y, Budoff M, et al. Coronary
artery calcium score for long-term risk classi-
ﬁcation in individuals with type 2 diabetes and
metabolic syndrome from the Multi-Ethnic Study
of Atherosclerosis. JAMA Cardiol 2017;2:1332–
1340
204. Kannel WB, Hjortland M, Castelli WP. Role
of diabetes in congestive heart failure: the
Framingham study. Am J Cardiol 1974;34:29–34
205. He J, Ogden LG, Bazzano LA, Vupputuri S,
Loria C, Whelton PK. Risk factors for congestive
heart failure in US men and women: NHANES I
epidemiologic follow-up study. Arch Intern Med
2001;161:996–1002
206. Thrainsdottir IS, Aspelund T, Thorgeirsson
G, et al. The association between glucose
abnormalities and heart failure in the population-
based Reykjavik study. Diabetes Care 2005;28:
612–616
207. Rosengren A, Vestberg D, Svensson AM,
et al. Long-term excess risk of heart failure in
people with type 1 diabetes: a prospective case-
control study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2015;
3:876–885
208. Ohkuma
T,
Komorita
Y,
Peters
SAE,
Woodward M. Diabetes as a risk factor for heart
failure in women and men: a systematic review
and
meta-analysis
of
47
cohorts
including
12 million individuals. Diabetologia 2019;62:1550–
1560
209. Birkeland KI, Bodegard J, Eriksson JW, et al.
Heart failure and chronic kidney disease mani-
festation and mortality risk associations in type 2
diabetes: a large multinational cohort study.
Diabetes Obes Metab 2020;22:1607–1618
210. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al.
2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the manage-
ment of heart failure: a report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Associa-
tion Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guide-
lines. Circulation 2022;145:e895–e1032
211. Segar MW, Patel KV, Vaduganathan M,
et al. Association of long-term change and
variability in glycemia with risk of incident heart
failure among patients with type 2 diabetes: a
secondary analysis of the ACCORD trial. Diabetes
Care 2020;43:1920–1928
212. Echouffo-Tcheugui JB, Ndumele CE, Zhang
S, et al. Diabetes and progression of heart failure:
the Atherosclerosis Risk In Communities (ARIC)
study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2022;79:2285–2293
213. Ledwidge M, Gallagher J, Conlon C, et al.
Natriuretic peptide-based screening and colla-
borative care for heart failure: the STOP-HF
randomized trial. JAMA 2013;310:66–74
214. Huelsmann M, Neuhold S, Resl M, et al.
PONTIAC (NT-proBNP selected prevention of
cardiac events in a population of diabetic
patients without a history of cardiac disease): a
prospective randomized controlled trial. J Am
Coll Cardiol 2013;62:1365–1372
215. Januzzi JL Jr, Xu J, Li J, et al. Effects of
canagliﬂozin
on
amino-terminal
pro-B-type
natriuretic peptide: implications for cardiov-
ascular risk reduction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2020;
76:2076–2085
216. Jarolim P, White WB, Cannon CP, Gao Q,
Morrow DA. Serial measurement of natriuretic
peptides and cardiovascular outcomes in patients
with type 2 diabetes in the EXAMINE trial.
Diabetes Care 2018;41:1510–1515
217. Pandey A, Vaduganathan M, Patel KV, et al.
Biomarker-based
risk
prediction
of
incident
heart failure in pre-diabetes and diabetes. JACC
Heart Fail 2021;9:215–223
218. Rørth R, Jørgensen PG, Andersen HU, et al.
Cardiovascular prognostic value of echocardio-
graphy and N terminal pro B-type natriuretic
peptide in type 1 diabetes: the Thousand & 1
Study. Eur J Endocrinol 2020;182:481–488
219. Gaede P, Vedel P, Larsen N, Jensen GV,
Parving HH, Pedersen O. Multifactorial inter-
vention and cardiovascular disease in patients
with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2003;
348:383–393
220. Gaede P, Hildebrandt P, Hess G, Parving HH,
Pedersen
O.
Plasma
N-terminal
pro-brain
natriuretic peptide as a major risk marker for
cardiovascular disease in patients with type 2
diabetes and microalbuminuria. Diabetologia
2005;48:156–163
221. Redﬁeld MM, Jacobsen SJ, Burnett JC Jr,
Mahoney DW, Bailey KR, Rodeheffer RJ. Burden
of systolic and diastolic ventricular dysfunction in
the community: appreciating the scope of the
heart failure epidemic. JAMA 2003;289:194–202
222. Selvin E, Erlinger TP. Prevalence of and risk
factors for peripheral arterial disease in the
United States: results from the National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999-2000.
Circulation 2004;110:738–743
223. Leibson CL, Ransom JE, Olson W, Zimmerman
BR, O’Fallon WM, Palumbo PJ. Peripheral arterial
disease, diabetes, and mortality. Diabetes Care
2004;27:2843–2849
224. Murabito JM, D’Agostino RB, Silbershatz H,
Wilson WF. Intermittent claudication. A risk
proﬁle from the Framingham Heart Study.
Circulation 1997;96:44–49
225. Hirsch AT, Criqui MH, Treat-Jacobson D,
et al. Peripheral arterial disease detection,
awareness, and treatment in primary care. JAMA
2001;286:1317–1324
226. Lange S, Diehm C, Darius H, et al. High
prevalence of peripheral arterial disease and low
treatment rates in elderly primary care patients
with diabetes. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes 2004;
112:566–573
227. Grøndal N, Søgaard R, Lindholt JS. Baseline
prevalence
of
abdominal
aortic
aneurysm,
peripheral arterial disease and hypertension in
men aged 65-74 years from a population screening
study (VIVA trial). Br J Surg 2015;102:902–906
228. Eason SL, Petersen NJ, Suarez-Almazor M,
Davis B, Collins TC. Diabetes mellitus, smoking,
and the risk for asymptomatic peripheral arterial
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S215
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

disease: whom should we screen? J Am Board
Fam Pract 2005;18:355–361
229. Adler AI, Stevens RJ, Neil A, Stratton IM,
Boulton AJ, Holman RR. UKPDS 59: hyper-
glycemia and other potentially modiﬁable risk
factors for peripheral vascular disease in type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2002;25:894–899
230. Al-Delaimy WK, Merchant AT, Rimm EB,
Willett WC, Stampfer MJ, Hu FB. Effect of type 2
diabetes and its duration on the risk of peripheral
arterial disease among men. Am J Med 2004;
116:236–240
231. Beckman JA, Duncan MS, Damrauer SM,
et al. Microvascular disease, peripheral artery
disease, and amputation. Circulation 2019;140:
449–458
232. Olesen KKW, Anand S, Thim T, Gyldenkerne
C, Maeng M. Microvascular disease increases the
risk of lower limb amputation—a western Danish
cohort study. Eur J Clin Invest 2022;52:e13812
233. Smolderen KG, Ameli O, Chaisson CE,
Heath K, Mena-Hurtado C. Peripheral artery
disease screening in the community and 1-year
mortality, cardiovascular events, and adverse
limb events. AJPM Focus 2022;1:100016
234. Smolderen KG, Heath K, Scherr T, Bauzon
SR, Howell AN, Mena-Hurtado C. The Nevada
peripheral artery disease screening effort in a
Medicare Advantage population and subsequent
mortality and major adverse cardiovascular event
risk. J Vasc Surg 2022;75:2054–2064.e3
235. Lindholt JS, Søgaard R. Population screening
and intervention for vascular disease in Danish men
(VIVA): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2017;
390:2256–2265
236. Wing RR, Bolin P, Brancati FL, et al.; Look
AHEAD Research Group. Cardiovascular effects of
intensive lifestyle intervention in type 2 diabetes.
N Engl J Med 2013;369:145–154
237. Yusuf S, Sleight P, Pogue J, Bosch J, Davies
R; Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study
Investigators. Effects of an angiotensin-converting-
enzyme inhibitor, ramipril, on cardiovascular
events in high-risk patients. N Engl J Med 2000;
342:145–153
238. Braunwald E, Domanski MJ, Fowler SE,
et al.; PEACE Trial Investigators. Angiotensin-
converting-enzyme inhibition in stable coronary
artery disease. N Engl J Med 2004;351:2058–
2068
239. Filippatos G, Anker SD, Agarwal R, et al.;
FIGARO-DKD Investigators. Finerenone reduces
risk of incident heart failure in patients with
chronic kidney disease and type 2 diabetes:
analyses from the FIGARO-DKD trial. Circulation
2022;145:437–447
240. Pitt B, Filippatos G, Agarwal R, et al.;
FIGARO-DKD Investigators. Cardiovascular events
with ﬁnerenone in kidney disease and type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2021;385:2252–2263
241. Agarwal R, Filippatos G, Pitt B, et al.;
FIDELIO-DKD
and
FIGARO-DKD
investigators.
Cardiovascular
and
kidney
outcomes
with
ﬁnerenone in patients with type 2 diabetes and
chronic kidney disease: the FIDELITY pooled
analysis. Eur Heart J 2022;43:474–484
242. Anker SD, Butler J, Filippatos G, et al.;
EMPEROR-Preserved Trial Investigators. Empagliﬂozin
in heart failure with a preserved ejection
fraction. N Engl J Med 2021;385:1451–1461
243. Kezerashvili A, Marzo K, De Leon J. Beta
blocker use after acute myocardial infarction in
the patient with normal systolic function: when
is it “ok” to discontinue? Curr Cardiol Rev
2012;8:77–84
244. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al.;
American
College
of
Cardiology
Foundation;
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines;
American
College
of
Physicians;
American
Association
for
Thoracic
Surgery;
Preventive
Cardiovascular
Nurses
Association;
Society
for
Cardiovascular
Angiography
and
Interventions; Society of Thoracic Surgeons. 2012
ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for
the diagnosis and management of patients with
stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the
American
College
of
Cardiology
Foundation/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians,
American
Association
for
Thoracic
Surgery,
Preventive
Cardiovascular
Nurses
Association,
Society
for
Cardiovascular
Angiography
and
Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J
Am Coll Cardiol 2012;60:e44–e164
245. U.S.
Food
and
Drug
Administration.
Guidance
for
industry.
Diabetes
mellitus—
evaluating cardiovascular risk in new antidiabetic
therapies to treat type 2 diabetes. Silver Spring,
MD, 2008. Accessed 10 October 2023. Available
from https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/
2008/12/19/E8-30086/guidance-for-industry-on-
diabetes-mellitus-evaluating-cardiovascular-risk-
in-new-antidiabetic
246. Marx N, Rosenstock J, Kahn SE, et al.
Design and baseline characteristics of the
CARdiovascular
Outcome
Trial
of
LINAgliptin
Versus Glimepiride in Type 2 Diabetes (CAROLINA).
Diab Vasc Dis Res 2015;12:164–174
247. Perkovic V, Jardine MJ, Neal B, et al.;
CREDENCE Trial Investigators. Canagliﬂozin and
renal
outcomes
in
type
2
diabetes
and
nephropathy. N Engl J Med 2019;380:2295–2306
248. Neal B, Perkovic V, Matthews DR, et al.;
CANVAS-R Trial Collaborative Group. Rationale,
design
and
baseline
characteristics
of
the
CANagliﬂozin cardioVascular Assessment Study-
Renal
(CANVAS-R):
a
randomized,
placebo-
controlled trial. Diabetes Obes Metab 2017;19:
387–393
249. Wiviott SD, Raz I, Bonaca MP, et al.;
DECLARE–TIMI 58 Investigators. Dapagliﬂozin
and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes.
N Engl J Med 2019;380:347–357
250. Heerspink HJL, Stefansson BV, Correa-
Rotter R, et al.; DAPA-CKD Trial Committees and
Investigators.
Dapagliﬂozin
in
patients
with
chronic kidney disease. N Engl J Med 2020;383:
1436–1446
251. Nassif ME, Windsor SL, Borlaug BA, et al.
The SGLT2 inhibitor dapagliﬂozin in heart failure
with preserved ejection fraction: a multicenter
randomized trial. Nat Med 2021;27:1954–1960
252. Solomon SD, McMurray JJV, Claggett B,
et al.; DELIVER Trial Committees and Investi-
gators. Dapagliﬂozin in heart failure with mildly
reduced or preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J
Med 2022;387:1089–1098
253. Packer M, Anker SD, Butler J, et al.;
EMPEROR-Reduced Trial Investigators. Cardiovascular
and renal outcomes with empagliﬂozin in heart
failure. N Engl J Med 2020;383:1413–1424
254. Cannon CP, Pratley R, Dagogo-Jack S, et al.;
VERTIS CV Investigators. Cardiovascular out-
comes with ertugliﬂozin in type 2 diabetes. N Engl
J Med 2020;383:1425–1435
255. Marso SP, Daniels GH, Brown-Frandsen K,
et al.; LEADER Steering Committee; LEADER Trial
Investigators.
Liraglutide
and
cardiovascular
outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med
2016;375:311–322
256. Marso SP, Bain SC, Consoli A, et al.;
SUSTAIN-6
Investigators.
Semaglutide
and
cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2016;375:1834–1844
257. Husain M, Birkenfeld AL, Donsmark M,
et al.; PIONEER 6 Investigators. Oral semaglutide
and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with
type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;381:841–851
258. Hernandez AF, Green JB, Janmohamed S,
et al.; Harmony Outcomes committees and
investigators.
Albiglutide
and
cardiovascular
outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes and
cardiovascular disease (Harmony Outcomes): a
double-blind,
randomised
placebo-controlled
trial. Lancet 2018;392:1519–1529
259. Gerstein HC, Colhoun HM, Dagenais GR,
et al.; REWIND Investigators. Dulaglutide and
cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes
(REWIND): a double-blind, randomised placebo-
controlled trial. Lancet 2019;394:121–130
260. Pfeffer MA, Claggett B, Diaz R, et al.; ELIXA
Investigators. Lixisenatide in patients with type 2
diabetes and acute coronary syndrome. N Engl J
Med 2015;373:2247–2257
261. Holman RR, Bethel MA, Mentz RJ, et al.;
EXSCEL Study Group. Effects of once-weekly
exenatide on cardiovascular outcomes in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;377:1228–1239
262. Zelniker TA, Wiviott SD, Raz I, et al.
Comparison of the effects of glucagon-like
peptide receptor agonists and sodium-glucose
cotransporter 2 inhibitors for prevention of major
adverse cardiovascular and renal outcomes in
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Circulation 2019;139:
2022–2031
263. Palmer SC, Tendal B, Mustafa RA, et al.
Sodium-glucose cotransporter protein-2 (SGLT-2)
inhibitors and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1)
receptor agonists for type 2 diabetes: systematic
review and network meta-analysis of randomised
controlled trials. BMJ 2021;372:m4573
264. Zelniker TA, Wiviott SD, Raz I, et al. SGLT2
inhibitors for primary and secondary prevention
of cardiovascular and renal outcomes in type 2
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of cardiovascular outcome trials. Lancet 2019;
393:31–39
265. McGuire DK, Shih WJ, Cosentino F, et al.
Association of SGLT2 inhibitors with cardio-
vascular and kidney outcomes in patients with
type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. JAMA Cardiol
2021;6:148–158
266. Gerstein HC, Sattar N, Rosenstock J, et al.;
AMPLITUDE-O Trial Investigators. Cardiovascular
and renal outcomes with efpeglenatide in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2021;385:896–907
267. Lam CSP, Ramasundarahettige C, Branch
KRH, et al. Efpeglenatide and clinical outcomes
with and without concomitant sodium-glucose
cotransporter-2 inhibition use in type 2 diabetes:
exploratory analysis of the AMPLITUDE-O trial.
Circulation 2022;145:565–574
268. Del Gobbo LC, Kalantarian S, Imamura F,
et al. Contribution of major lifestyle risk factors
for incident heart failure in older adults: the
S216
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Cardiovascular Health Study. JACC Heart Fail
2015;3:520–528
269. Young DR, Reynolds K, Sidell M, et al.
Effects of physical activity and sedentary time on
the risk of heart failure. Circ Heart Fail 2014;
7:21–27
270. Tektonidis TG, Åkesson A, Gigante B, Wolk
A, Larsson SC. Adherence to a Mediterranean
diet is associated with reduced risk of heart
failure in men. Eur J Heart Fail 2016;18:253–259
271. Levitan EB, Wolk A, Mittleman MA. Con-
sistency with the DASH diet and incidence of
heart failure. Arch Intern Med 2009;169:851–857
272. Levy D, Larson MG, Vasan RS, Kannel WB, Ho
KK.The progression from hypertension to congestive
heart failure. JAMA 1996;275:1557–1562
273. UK Prospective Diabetes Study Group.Tight
blood pressure control and risk of macrovascular
and microvascular complications in type 2
diabetes: UKPDS 38. BMJ 1998;317:703–713
274. Upadhya B, Rocco M, Lewis CE, et al.;
SPRINT Research Group. Effect of intensive blood
pressure treatment on heart failure events in the
systolic blood pressure reduction intervention
trial. Circ Heart Fail 2017;10:e003613
275. Yusuf S, Pitt B, Davis CE, Hood WB Jr;
SOLVD Investigators. Effect of enalapril on
mortality and the development of heart failure in
asymptomatic
patients
with
reduced
left
ventricular ejection fractions. N Engl J Med
1992;327:685–691
276. Pfeffer MA, Braunwald E, Moye LA, et al.;
The SAVE Investigators. Effect of captopril on
mortality and morbidity in patients with left
ventricular dysfunction after myocardial infarction.
Results of the Survival and Ventricular Enlarge-
ment trial. N Engl J Med 1992;327:669–677
277. Exner DV, Dries DL, Waclawiw MA, Shelton
B, Domanski MJ. Beta-adrenergic blocking agent
use and mortality in patients with asymptomatic
and
symptomatic
left
ventricular
systolic
dysfunction: a post hoc analysis of the Studies of
Left Ventricular Dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol
1999;33:916–923
278. Vantrimpont P, Rouleau JL, Wun CC, et al.;
SAVE Investigators. Additive beneﬁcial effects of
beta-blockers to angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors
in
the
Survival
and
Ventricular
Enlargement (SAVE) study. J Am Coll Cardiol
1997;29:229–236
279. Dargie HJ. Effect of carvedilol on outcome
after myocardial infarction in patients with
left-ventricular
dysfunction:
the
CAPRICORN
randomised trial. Lancet 2001;357:1385–1390
280. Colucci WS, Kolias TJ, Adams KF, et al.;
REVERT Study Group. Metoprolol reverses left
ventricular remodeling in patients with asymp-
tomatic systolic dysfunction: the REversal of
VEntricular Remodeling with Toprol-XL (REVERT)
trial. Circulation 2007;116:49–56
281. Bhatt DL, Szarek M, Pitt B, et al.; SCORED
Investigators.
Sotagliﬂozin
in
patients
with
diabetes and chronic kidney disease. N Engl J
Med 2021;384:129–139
282. Bakris GL, Agarwal R, Anker SD, et al.;
FIDELIO-DKD Investigators. Effect of ﬁnerenone
on chronic kidney disease outcomes in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2020;383:2219–2229
283. Dormandy JA, Charbonnel B, Eckland DJ,
et al.; PROactive Investigators. Secondary pre-
vention of macrovascular events in patients with
type
2
diabetes
in
the
PROactive
Study
(PROspective pioglitAzone Clinical Trial In macro-
Vascular Events): a randomised controlled trial.
Lancet 2005;366:1279–1289
284. Singh S, Loke YK, Furberg CD. Long-term
risk of cardiovascular events with rosiglitazone: a
meta-analysis. JAMA 2007;298:1189–1195
285. Lincoff AM, Wolski K, Nicholls SJ, Nissen SE.
Pioglitazone and risk of cardiovascular events in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a meta-
analysis of randomized trials. JAMA 2007;298:
1180–1188
286. Inzucchi SE, Masoudi FA, McGuire DK.
Metformin in heart failure. Diabetes Care 2007;
30:e129
287. Eurich DT, Majumdar SR, McAlister FA,
Tsuyuki
RT,
Johnson
JA.
Improved
clinical
outcomes associated with metformin in patients
with diabetes and heart failure. Diabetes Care
2005;28:2345–2351
288. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA
drug safety communication: FDA revises warnings
regarding use of the diabetes medicine metformin
in certain patients with reduced kidney function,
2016. Accessed 10 October 2023. Available from
https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-
availability/fda-drug-safety-communication-
fda-revises-warnings-regarding-use-diabetes-
medicine-metformin-certain
289. Scirica BM, Bhatt DL, Braunwald E, et al.;
SAVOR-TIMI 53 Steering Committee and Investi-
gators. Saxagliptin and cardiovascular outcomes
in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J
Med 2013;369:1317–1326
290. Zannad F, Cannon CP, Cushman WC, et al.;
EXAMINE
Investigators.
Heart
failure
and
mortality outcomes in patients with type 2
diabetes taking alogliptin versus placebo in
EXAMINE: a multicentre, randomised, double-
blind trial. Lancet 2015;385:2067–2076
291. Green JB, Bethel MA, Armstrong PW, et al.;
TECOS Study Group. Effect of sitagliptin on
cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N
Engl J Med 2015;373:232–242
292. Rosenstock J, Perkovic V, Johansen OE,
et
al.;
CARMELINA
Investigators.
Effect
of
linagliptin vs placebo on major cardiovascular
events in adults with type 2 diabetes and high
cardiovascular and renal risk: the CARMELINA
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2019;321:69–79
293. Vaduganathan M, Docherty KF, Claggett BL,
et al. SGLT-2 inhibitors in patients with heart failure:
a comprehensive meta-analysis of ﬁve rando-mised
controlled trials. Lancet 2022;400:757–767
294. Packer M, Anker SD, Butler J, et al. Effect of
empagliﬂozin on the clinical stability of patients
with heart failure and a reduced ejection
fraction: the EMPEROR-Reduced trial. Circulation
2021;143:326–336
295. Voors AA, Angermann CE, Teerlink JR, et al.
The SGLT2 inhibitor empagliﬂozin in patients
hospitalized for acute heart failure: a multi-
national randomized trial. Nat Med 2022;28:568–574
296. Spertus JA, Birmingham MC, Nassif M,
et al. The SGLT2 inhibitor canagliﬂozin in heart
failure: the CHIEF-HF remote, patient-centered
randomized trial. Nat Med 2022;28:809–813
297. Bhatt DL, Szarek M, Steg PG, et al.;
SOLOIST-WHF Trial Investigators. Sotagliﬂozin in
patients with diabetes and recent worsening
heart failure. N Engl J Med 2021;384:117–128
298. Peters AL, Henry RR,Thakkar P,Tong C, Alba
M. Diabetic ketoacidosis with canagliﬂozin, a
sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor, in
patients with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care
2016;39:532–538
299. Danne
T,
Garg
S,
Peters
AL,
et
al.
International consensus on risk management of
diabetic ketoacidosis in patients with type 1
diabetes treated with sodium–glucose cotran-
sporter (SGLT) inhibitors. Diabetes Care 2019;42:
1147–1154
300. Musso G, Sircana A, Saba F, Cassader M,
Gambino R. Assessing the risk of ketoacidosis due
to
sodium-glucose
cotransporter
(SGLT)-2
inhibitors in patients with type 1 diabetes: a
meta-analysis and meta-regression. PLoS Med
2020;17:e1003461
301. Holt RIG, DeVries JH, Hess-Fischl A, et al.
The management of type 1 diabetes in adults. A
consensus report by the American Diabetes
Association (ADA) and the European Association
for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care
2021;44:2589–2625
302. Rosenstock J, Marquard J, Laffel LM, et al.
Empagliﬂozin as adjunctive to insulin therapy in
type 1 diabetes: the EASE trials. Diabetes Care
2018;41:2560–2569
303. Mathieu C, Dandona P, Gillard P, et al.;
DEPICT-2 Investigators. Efﬁcacy and safety of
dapagliﬂozin
in
patients
with
inadequately
controlled type 1 diabetes (the DEPICT-2 study):
24-week results from a randomized controlled
trial. Diabetes Care 2018;41:1938–1946
304. Garg SK, Henry RR, Banks P, et al. Effects of
sotagliﬂozin added to insulin in patients with type
1 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;377:2337–2348
305. Rodbard HW, Peters AL, Slee A, Cao A,
Traina SB, Alba M. The effect of canagliﬂozin, a
sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor, on
glycemic end points assessed by continuous
glucose monitoring and patient-reported out-
comes among people with type 1 diabetes.
Diabetes Care 2017;40:171–180
306. Palanca A, van Nes F, Pardo F, Ampudia
Blasco FJ, Mathieu C. Real-world evidence of
efﬁcacy and safety of SGLT2 inhibitors as
adjunctive therapy in adults with type 1 diabetes:
a European two-center experience. Diabetes
Care 2022;45:650–658
307. U.S.
Food
and
Drug
Administration.
Meeting of the Endocrinologic and Metabolic
Drugs Advisory Committee. 2019. Accessed 10
August 2023. Available from https://wayback
.archive-it.org/7993/20190207212714/
https://
www.fda.gov/downloads/AdvisoryCommittees/
CommitteesMeetingMaterials/Drugs/Endocrinologic
andMetabolicDrugsAdvisoryCommittee/UCM629782
.pdf
308. Gansevoort RT, Correa-Rotter R, Hemmelgarn
BR, et al. Chronic kidney disease and cardiovascular
risk: epidemiology, mechanisms, and prevention.
Lancet 2013;382:339–352
309. Das SR, Everett BM, Birtcher KK, et al. 2020
Expert consensus decision pathway on novel
therapies for cardiovascular risk reduction in
patients with type 2 diabetes: a report of the
American College of Cardiology Solution Set
Oversight Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol 2020;76:
1117–1145
310. Zoungas S, Chalmers J, Neal B, et al.;
ADVANCE-ON Collaborative Group. Follow-up of
blood-pressure lowering and glucose control in
type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2014;371:1392–1406
diabetesjournals.org/care
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
S217
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

311. White WB, Cannon CP, Heller SR, et al.;
EXAMINE Investigators. Alogliptin after acute
coronary syndrome in patients with type 2
diabetes.
N
Engl
J
Med
2013;369:1327–
1335
312. Rosenstock J, Perkovic V, Alexander JH,
et al.; CARMELINA Investigators. Rationale,
design, and baseline characteristics of the
CArdiovascular safety and Renal Microvascular
outcomE study with LINAgliptin (CARMELINA): a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
clinical trial in patients with type 2 diabetes and
high
cardio-renal
risk.
Cardiovasc
Diabetol
2018;17:39
313. Cefalu WT, Kaul S, Gerstein HC, et al. Cardio-
vascular outcomes trials in type 2 diabetes: where
do we go from here? Reﬂections from a Diabetes
Care editors’ expert forum. Diabetes Care 2018;
41:14–31
314. Wheeler DC, Stefansson BV, Batiushin
M, et al. The Dapagliﬂozin and Prevention of
Adverse Outcomes in Chronic Kidney Disease
(DAPA-CKD) trial: baseline characteristics.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 2020;35:1700–1711
315. Cannon CP, McGuire DK, Pratley R, et al.;
VERTIS-CV Investigators. Design and baseline
characteristics of the eValuation of ERTugli-
ﬂozin
effIcacy
and
Safety
CardioVascular
outcomes trial (VERTIS-CV). Am Heart J 2018;
206:11–23
316. Anker SD, Butler J, Filippatos G, et al.;
EMPEROR-Preserved
Trial
Committees
and
Investigators. Baseline characteristics of patients
with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction
in the EMPEROR-Preserved trial. Eur J Heart Fail
2020;22:2383–2392
S218
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

11. Chronic Kidney Disease and
Risk Management: Standards of
Care in Diabetes—2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S219–S230 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S011
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes
the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the
components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to
evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee, an
interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of
Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA
standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s
clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee
members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to com-
ment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
For prevention and management of diabetes complications in children and adolescents,
please refer to Section 14, “Children and Adolescents.”
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
Screening
Recommendations
11.1a At least annually, urinary albumin (e.g., spot urinary albumin-to-creatinine
ratio [UACR]) and estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate [eGFR] should be assessed
in people with type 1 diabetes with duration of $5 years and in all people with
type 2 diabetes regardless of treatment. B
11.1b In people with established chronic kidney disease (CKD), urinary albu-
min (e.g., spot UACR) and eGFR should be monitored 1–4 times per year de-
pending on the stage of the kidney disease (Fig. 11.1). B
Treatment
Recommendations
11.2 Optimize glucose management to reduce the risk or slow the progression
of CKD. A
11.3 Optimize blood pressure control and reduce blood pressure variability to
reduce the risk or slow the progression of CKD and reduce cardiovascular
risk. A
11.4a In nonpregnant people with diabetes and hypertension, either an ACE
inhibitor or an angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) is recommended for those
with moderately increased albuminuria (UACR 30–299 mg/g creatinine) B and is
strongly recommended for those with severely increased albuminuria (UACR
$300 mg/g creatinine) and/or eGFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2 to prevent the pro-
gression of kidney disease and reduce cardiovascular events. A
*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee. 11. Chronic
kidney disease and risk management: Standards
of Care in Diabetes—2024. Diabetes Care 2024;
47(Suppl. 1):S219–S230
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
11. CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE AND RISK MANAGEMENT
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
S219
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

11.4b Periodically monitor for increased
serum creatinine and potassium levels
when ACE inhibitors, ARBs, and miner-
alocorticoid receptor antagonists are
used, or for hypokalemia when diu-
retics are used. B
11.4c An ACE inhibitor or an ARB is
not recommended for the primary pre-
vention of CKD in people with diabetes
who have normal blood pressure, nor-
mal UACR (<30 mg/g creatinine), and
normal eGFR. A
11.4d Do not discontinue renin-
angiotensin system blockade for mild
to moderate increases in serum creati-
nine (#30%) in the absence of signs of
extracellular ﬂuid volume depletion. A
11.5a For people with type 2 diabe-
tes and CKD, use of a sodium–glucose
cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor is
recommended to reduce CKD pro-
gression and cardiovascular events in
individuals with eGFR $20 mL/min/
1.73 m2 and urinary albumin $200 mg/g
creatinine. A
11.5b For people with type 2 diabe-
tes and CKD, use of an SGLT2 inhibi-
tor is recommended to reduce CKD
progression and cardiovascular events
in individuals with eGFR $20 mL/min/
1.73 m2 and urinary albumin rang-
ing from normal to 200 mg/g creati-
nine. B
11.5c For cardiovascular risk reduc-
tion in people with type 2 diabetes
and CKD, consider use of an SGLT2
inhibitor (if eGFR is $20 mL/min/
1.73 m2), a glucagon-like peptide 1
agonist, or a nonsteroidal mineralo-
corticoid receptor antagonist (if eGFR
is $25 mL/min/1.73 m2). A
11.5d As people with CKD and albu-
minuria are at increased risk for
cardiovascular events and CKD pro-
gression, a nonsteroidal mineralocor-
ticoid receptor antagonist that has
been shown to be effective in clinical
trials is recommended to reduce car-
diovascular events and CKD progres-
sion (if eGFR is $25 mL/min/1.73 m2).
Potassium levels should be moni-
tored. A
11.6 In people with CKD who have
$300 mg/g urinary albumin, a reduc-
tion of 30% or greater in mg/g urinary
albumin is recommended to slow CKD
progression. C
11.7 For people with non–dialysis-
dependent stage G3 or higher CKD,
dietary protein intake should be aimed
to a target level of 0.8 g/kg body
weight per day. A For individuals on
dialysis, 1.0–1.2 g/kg/day of dietary
protein intake should be considered
since protein energy wasting is a ma-
jor problem in some individuals on
dialysis. B
11.8 Individuals should be referred
for evaluation by a nephrologist if
they have continuously increasing
urinary albumin levels and/or con-
tinuously decreasing eGFR and/or if
the eGFR is <30 mL/min/1.73 m2. A
11.9 Promptly refer to a nephrologist
for uncertainty about the etiology of
Albuminuria categories
Description and range
GFR categories (mL/min/1.73 m2)
Description and range
A1
G1
≥90
G2
60–89
G3a
45–59
G3b
30–44
G4
15–29
G5
<15
Kidney failure
Severely decreased
Moderately to
severely decreased
Mildly to
moderately decreased
Mildly decreased
Normal or high
A2
A3
Normal to mildly
increased
Moderately
increased
Severely
increased
<30 mg/g
<3 mg/mmol
Screen
1
Screen
1
Treat
1
Treat
1
Treat and refer
3
Treat and refer
3
Treat
1
Treat
2
Treat
2
Treat and refer
3
Treat and refer
3
Treat and refer
3
Treat and refer*
3
Treat and refer
4+
Treat and refer*
3
Treat and refer
4+
Treat and refer
4+
Treat and refer
4+
30–299 mg/g
3–29 mg/mmol
 ≥300 mg/g
 ≥30 mg/mmol
CKD is classified based on:
• Cause (C)
• GFR (G)
• Albuminuria (A)
Low risk (if no other markers of kidney disease, no CKD)
Moderately increased risk
High risk
Very high risk
Figure 11.1—Risk of CKD progression, frequency of visits, and referral to nephrology according to GFR and albuminuria. The numbers in the boxes
are a guide to the frequency of screening or monitoring (number of times per year). Green reﬂects no evidence of CKD by estimated GFR or albu-
minuria, with screening indicated once per year. For monitoring of prevalent CKD, suggested monitoring varies from once per year (yellow) to four
times or more per year (i.e., every 1–3 months, [deep red]) according to risks of CKD progression and CKD complications (e.g., cardiovascular dis-
ease, anemia, hyperparathyroidism). These are general parameters based only on expert opinion and underlying comorbid conditions, and disease
state must be taken into account, as well as the likelihood of impacting a change in management for any individual. CKD, chronic kidney disease;
GFR, glomerular ﬁltration rate. Reprinted and adapted from de Boer et al. (1).
S220
Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

kidney disease, difﬁcult management
issues, and rapidly progressing kidney
disease. B
EPIDEMIOLOGY OF DIABETES AND
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is diag-
nosed by the persistent elevation of uri-
nary albumin excretion (albuminuria),
low estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate
(eGFR), or other manifestations of kid-
ney damage (1). In this section, the
focus is on CKD attributed to diabetes
(diabetic kidney disease) in adults, which
occurs in 20–40% of people with diabe-
tes (1–4). Diabetic kidney disease typi-
cally develops after a diabetes duration
of 10 years in type 1 diabetes (the most
common presentation is 5–15 years af-
ter the diagnosis of type 1 diabetes) but
may be present at diagnosis of type 2
diabetes. CKD can progress to end-stage
kidney disease (ESKD) requiring dialysis
or kidney transplantation and is the
leading cause of ESKD in the U.S. (5). In
addition, among people with type 1 or
type 2 diabetes, the presence of CKD
markedly increases cardiovascular risk
and health care costs (6). For details on
the management of diabetic kidney dis-
ease in children, please see Section 14,
“Children and Adolescents.”
ASSESSMENT OF ALBUMINURIA
AND ESTIMATED GLOMERULAR
FILTRATION RATE
Screening for albuminuria can be most
easily performed by urinary albumin-
to-creatinine ratio (UACR) in a random
spot urine collection (1). Timed or 24-h
collections are more burdensome and
add little to prediction or accuracy.
Measurement of a spot urine sample
for albumin alone (whether by immu-
noassay or by using a sensitive dipstick
test speciﬁc for albuminuria) without
simultaneously measuring urine creati-
nine is less expensive but susceptible
to false-negative and false-positive de-
terminations as a result of variation in
urine concentration due to hydration
(7). Thus, semiquantitative or qualita-
tive (dipstick) screening will need to be
conﬁrmed by UACR values in an ac-
credited laboratory (8,9). Hence, it is
better to simply collect a spot urine
sample for albumin-to-creatinine ratio
because it will ultimately need to be
done.
Normal level of urine albumin excre-
tion is deﬁned as <30 mg/g creatinine,
moderately elevated albuminuria is de-
ﬁned as $30–300 mg/g creatinine, and
severely elevated albuminuria is deﬁned
as $300 mg/g creatinine. However, UACR
is a continuous measurement, and differ-
ences within the normal and abnormal
ranges are associated with kidney and
cardiovascular outcomes (6,10,11). Fur-
thermore, because of high biological vari-
ability of >20% between measurements
in urinary albumin excretion, two of three
specimens of UACR collected within a
3- to 6-month period should be abnormal
before considering an individual to have
moderately or severely elevated albumin-
uria (1,12,13). Exercise within 24 h, infec-
tion, fever, congestive heart failure,
marked hyperglycemia, menstruation,
and marked hypertension may elevate
UACR independently of kidney damage
(14).
Traditionally, eGFR is calculated from
serum creatinine using a validated for-
mula (15). eGFR is routinely reported by
laboratories along with serum creati-
nine, and eGFR calculators are available
online at nkdep.nih.gov. An eGFR persis-
tently <60 mL/min/1.73 m2 and/or an
urinary albumin value of >30 mg/g cre-
atinine is considered abnormal, though
optimal thresholds for clinical diagnosis
are debated in older adults over age
70 years (1,16). Historically, a correction
factor for muscle mass was included in
a modiﬁed equation for African Ameri-
can people; however, race is a social
and not a biologic construct, making
it problematic to apply race to clinical
algorithms, and the need to advance
health equity and social justice is clear.
Thus, it was decided that the equation
should be altered such that it applies to
all. Hence, a committee was convened,
resulting in the recommendation for im-
mediate implementation of the Chronic
Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collabora-
tion (CKD-EPI) creatinine equation reﬁt
without the race variable in all laborato-
ries in the U.S. (17). The CKD-EPI Reﬁt
equation is the eGFR formula that is
now recommended for everyone (18).
Additionally, increased use of cystatin C
(another marker of eGFR) is suggested in
combination with serum creatinine be-
cause combining ﬁltration markers (cre-
atinine and cystatin C) is more accurate
and would support better clinical deci-
sions than either marker alone.
DIAGNOSIS OF DIABETIC KIDNEY
DISEASE
Diabetic kidney disease is a clinical diag-
nosis made based on the presence of
albuminuria and/or reduced eGFR in
the absence of signs or symptoms of
other primary causes of kidney damage.
The typical presentation of diabetic kid-
ney disease is considered to include
long-standing duration of diabetes, reti-
nopathy, albuminuria without gross he-
maturia, and gradually progressive loss
of eGFR. However, signs of diabetic kid-
ney disease may be present at diagnosis
or without retinopathy in type 2 diabe-
tes. Reduced eGFR without albuminuria
has been frequently reported in type 1
and type 2 diabetes and is becoming
more common over time as the preva-
lence of diabetes increases in the U.S.
(2,3,16,19–21). An active urinary sedi-
ment (containing red or white blood
cells or cellular casts), rapidly increasing
albuminuria or total proteinuria, the
presence of nephrotic syndrome, rapidly
decreasing eGFR, or the absence of reti-
nopathy (in type 1 diabetes) suggests al-
ternative or additional causes of kidney
disease. For individuals with these fea-
tures, referral to a nephrologist for fur-
ther diagnosis, including the possibility
of kidney biopsy, should be considered.
It is rare for people with type 1 diabetes
to develop kidney disease without reti-
nopathy. In type 2 diabetes, retinopathy is
only moderately sensitive and speciﬁc for
CKD caused by diabetes, as conﬁrmed by
kidney biopsy (22).
STAGING OF CHRONIC KIDNEY
DISEASE
Stage G1 and stage G2 CKD are deﬁned
by evidence of high albuminuria with
eGFR $60 mL/min/1.73 m2, and stages
G3–G5 CKD are deﬁned by progressively
lower ranges of eGFR (23) (Fig. 11.1). At
any eGFR, the degree of albuminuria is
associated with risk of cardiovascular dis-
ease (CVD), CKD progression, and mortal-
ity (6). Therefore, there is an additional
subclassiﬁcation by level of urine albumin
(Fig. 11.1). Furthermore, Kidney Disease:
Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO)
recommends a more comprehensive
CKD staging that incorporates albumin-
uria at all stages of eGFR; this system is
diabetesjournals.org/care
Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management
S221
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

more closely associated with risk but is
also more complex and does not trans-
late directly to treatment decisions (1).
Thus, based on the current classiﬁcation
system, both eGFR and albuminuria
must be quantiﬁed to guide treatment
decisions. Quantiﬁcation of eGFR levels
is essential for modiﬁcations of medica-
tion dosages or restrictions of use (Fig.
11.1) (23,24), and the degree of albu-
minuria should inﬂuence the choice of
antihypertensive medications (see Sec-
tion 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and
Risk Management”) or glucose-lowering
medications (see below). Observed his-
tory of eGFR loss (which is also associ-
ated with risk of CKD progression and
other adverse health outcomes) and
cause of kidney damage (including pos-
sible causes other than diabetes) may
also affect these decisions (25).
ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is diagnosed by a
sustained increase in serum creatinine
over a short period of time, which is also
reﬂected as a rapid decrease in eGFR
(26,27). People with diabetes are at higher
risk of AKI than those without diabetes
(28). Other risk factors for AKI include pre-
existing CKD, the use of medications that
cause kidney injury (e.g., nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs), certain intrave-
nous dyes (e.g., iodinated radiocontrast
agents) and the use of medications that
alter renal blood ﬂow and intrarenal he-
modynamics. In particular, many antihy-
pertensive medications (e.g., diuretics,
ACE inhibitors, and angiotensin receptor
blockers [ARBs]) can reduce intravascular
volume, renal blood ﬂow, and/or glomer-
ular ﬁltration. There was concern that
sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2)
inhibitors may promote AKI through vol-
ume depletion, particularly when com-
bined with diuretics or other medications
that reduce glomerular ﬁltration; how-
ever, this has not been found to be true
in randomized clinical outcome trials of
advanced kidney disease (29) or high CVD
risk with normal kidney function (30–32).
It is also noteworthy that the nonsteroi-
dal mineralocorticoid receptor antago-
nists (MRAs) do not increase the risk of
AKI when used to slow kidney disease
progression
(33). Timely identiﬁcation
and treatment of AKI is important be-
cause AKI is associated with increased
risks of progressive CKD and other poor
health outcomes (34).
Elevations in serum creatinine (up to
30% from baseline) with renin-angioten-
sin system (RAS) blockers (such as ACE
inhibitors and ARBs) must not be con-
fused with AKI (35). An analysis of the
Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in
Diabetes Blood Pressure (ACCORD BP)
trial demonstrated that participants ran-
domized to intensive blood pressure
lowering with up to a 30% increase in se-
rum creatinine did not have any increase
in mortality or progressive kidney disease
(36,37). Moreover, a measure of markers
for AKI showed no signiﬁcant increase
of any markers with increased creatinine
(37). Accordingly, ACE inhibitors and ARBs
should not be discontinued for increases
in serum creatinine (<30%) in the ab-
sence of volume depletion.
SURVEILLANCE
Both albuminuria and eGFR should be
monitored annually to enable timely di-
agnosis of CKD, monitor progression of
CKD, detect superimposed kidney dis-
eases including AKI, assess risk of CKD
complications, dose medications appro-
priately, and determine whether ne-
phrology referral is needed. Among
people with existing kidney disease, al-
buminuria and eGFR may change due to
progression of CKD, development of a
separate superimposed cause of kidney
disease, AKI, or other effects of medica-
tions, as noted above. Serum potassium
should also be monitored in individuals
treated with diuretics because these
medications
can
cause
hypokalemia,
which is associated with cardiovascular
risk and mortality (38–40). Individuals
with eGFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2 re-
ceiving ACE inhibitors, ARBs, or MRAs
should have serum potassium mea-
sured periodically. Additionally, people
with this lower range of eGFR should
have their medication dosing veriﬁed,
their exposure to nephrotoxins (e.g.,
nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs
and iodinated contrast) should be min-
imized, and they should be evaluated
for potential CKD complications (Table
11.1).
There is a clear need for annual quan-
titative assessment of urinary albumin
excretion. This is especially true after a
diagnosis of albuminuria, institution of ACE
inhibitors or ARB therapy to maximum
tolerated doses, and achievement of blood
pressure targets. Early changes in kidney
function may be detected by increases in
albuminuria before changes in eGFR (41),
and this also signiﬁcantly affects cardiovas-
cular risk. Moreover, an initial reduction of
>30% from baseline, subsequently main-
tained over at least 2 years, is considered
a valid surrogate for renal beneﬁt by
the Division of Cardiology and Nephrol-
ogy of the U.S. Food and Drug Adminis-
tration (FDA) (9). Continued surveillance
can assess both response to therapy and
disease progression and may aid in as-
sessing participation in ACE inhibitor or
ARB therapy. In addition, in clinical trials
of ACE inhibitors or ARB therapy in peo-
ple with type 2 diabetes, reducing albu-
minuria to levels <300 mg/g creatinine
or by >30% from baseline has been asso-
ciated with improved renal and cardiovas-
cular outcomes, leading some to suggest
that medications should be titrated to
maximize reduction in UACR. Data from
post hoc analyses demonstrate less bene-
ﬁt on cardiorenal outcomes at half doses
of RAS blockade (42). In type 1 diabetes,
remission of albuminuria may occur spon-
taneously, and cohort studies evaluating
associations of change in albuminuria
with clinical outcomes have reported
inconsistent results (43,44).
The prevalence of CKD complications
correlates with eGFR (40). When eGFR
is <60 mL/min/1.73 m2, screening for
complications of CKD is indicated (Table
11.1). Early vaccination against hepatitis
B virus is indicated in individuals likely
to progress to ESKD (see Section 4,
“Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and
Assessment of Comorbidities,” for further
information on immunization).
Prevention
The only proven primary prevention in-
terventions for CKD in people with diabe-
tes are blood glucose (A1C goal of 7%)
and blood pressure control (blood pres-
sure <130/80 mmHg). There is no evi-
dence that renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
system inhibitors or any other interven-
tions prevent the development of dia-
betic kidney disease in the absence of
hypertension or albuminuria. Thus, the
American Diabetes Association does not
recommend routine use of these medica-
tions solely for the purpose of preven-
tion of the development of diabetic
kidney disease.
S222
Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

INTERVENTIONS
Nutrition
For people with non–dialysis-dependent
CKD, dietary protein intake should be
0.8 g/kg body weight per day (the rec-
ommended daily allowance) (1). Com-
pared with higher levels of dietary
protein intake, this level slowed GFR de-
cline with evidence of a greater effect
over time. Higher levels of dietary pro-
tein intake (>20% of daily calories from
protein or >1.3 g/kg/day) have been
associated with increased albuminuria,
more rapid kidney function loss, and
CVD mortality and therefore should be
avoided. Reducing the amount of dietary
protein below the recommended daily
allowance of 0.8 g/kg/day is not recom-
mended because it does not alter blood
glucose levels, cardiovascular risk meas-
ures, or the course of GFR decline (45).
Restriction
of
dietary
sodium
(to
<2,300 mg/day) may be useful to con-
trol blood pressure and reduce cardiovas-
cular risk (46,47), and individualization of
dietary potassium may be necessary to
control serum potassium concentrations
(28,38–40). These interventions may be
most important for individuals with re-
duced eGFR, for whom urinary excretion
of sodium and potassium may be im-
paired. For individuals on dialysis, higher
levels of dietary protein intake should be
considered since malnutrition is a major
problem for some individuals on dialysis
(48). Recommendations for dietary sodium
and potassium intake should be individual-
ized based on comorbid conditions, medi-
cation use, blood pressure, and laboratory
data.
Glycemic Goals
Intensive lowering of blood glucose with
the goal of achieving near-normoglycemia
has been shown in large, randomized
studies to delay the onset and progres-
sion of albuminuria and reduce eGFR in
people with type 1 diabetes (49,50)
and type 2 diabetes (1,51–56). Insulin
alone was used to lower blood glucose
in the Diabetes Control and Complica-
tions Trial (DCCT)/Epidemiology of Dia-
betes Interventions and Complications
(EDIC) study of type 1 diabetes, while a
variety of agents were used in clinical
trials of type 2 diabetes, supporting the
conclusion that lowering blood glucose
itself helps prevent CKD and its progres-
sion. The effects of glucose-lowering ther-
apies on CKD have helped deﬁne A1C
goals.
The presence of CKD affects the risks
and beneﬁts of intensive lowering of
blood glucose and a number of speciﬁc
glucose-lowering medications. Adverse
effects of intensive management of
blood glucose levels (hypoglycemia and
mortality) were increased among people
with kidney disease at baseline (57).
Moreover, there is a lag time of at least
2 years in type 2 diabetes to over 10
years in type 1 diabetes for the effects
of intensive glucose control to manifest
as improved eGFR outcomes (54,58,59).
Therefore, in some people with preva-
lent CKD and substantial comorbidity,
treatment may be less intensive (i.e.,
A1C goals may be higher) to decrease
the risk of hypoglycemia (1,60). A1C lev-
els are also less reliable at advanced
CKD stages.
Blood Pressure and Use of ACE
Inhibitors and Angiotensin Receptor
Blockers
ACE inhibitors and ARBs remain a main-
stay of management for people with
CKD with albuminuria and for the treat-
ment of hypertension in people with di-
abetes (with or without diabetic kidney
disease). Indeed, all the trials that eval-
uated the beneﬁts of SGLT2 inhibition
or nonsteroidal mineralocorticoid recep-
tor antagonist effects were done in indi-
viduals who were being treated with an
ACE inhibitor or ARB, in some trials up
to maximum tolerated doses.
Hypertension is a strong risk factor
for the development and progression of
CKD (61). Antihypertensive therapy re-
duces the risk of albuminuria (62–65),
and among people with type 1 or 2
diabetes with established CKD (eGFR
<60
mL/min/1.73
m2
and
UACR
$300 mg/g creatinine), ACE inhibitor or
ARB therapy reduces the risk of progres-
sion to ESKD (66–75). Moreover, antihy-
pertensive therapy reduces the risk of
cardiovascular events (62).
A blood pressure level <130/80 mmHg
is recommended to reduce CVD mortality
and slow CKD progression among all peo-
ple with diabetes. Lower blood pressure
goals (e.g., <130/80 mmHg) should be
considered based on individual anticipated
beneﬁts and risks. People with CKD are at
increased risk of CKD progression (particu-
larly those with albuminuria) and CVD;
therefore, lower blood pressure goals may
be suitable in some cases, especially in in-
dividuals with severely elevated albumin-
uria ($300 mg/g creatinine).
ACE inhibitors or ARBs are the pre-
ferred ﬁrst-line agents for blood pressure
treatment among people with diabetes,
hypertension, eGFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2,
and UACR $300 mg/g creatinine because
of their proven beneﬁts for prevention of
CKD progression (66,67,69). ACE inhibitors
and ARBs are considered to have similar
beneﬁts (70,71) and risks. In the setting of
lower levels of albuminuria (30–299 mg/g
creatinine), ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy
at maximum tolerated doses in trials has
reduced progression to more advanced al-
buminuria ($300 mg/g creatinine), slowed
CKD progression, and reduced cardiovas-
cular events but has not reduced progres-
sion to ESKD (69,72). While ACE inhibitors
or ARBs are often prescribed for moder-
ately increased albuminuria (30–299 mg/g
creatinine) without hypertension, outcome
Table 11.1—Screening for selected complications of chronic kidney disease
Complication
Physical and laboratory evaluation
Blood pressure >130/80 mmHg
Blood pressure, weight, BMI
Volume overload
History, physical examination, weight
Electrolyte abnormalities
Serum electrolytes
Metabolic acidosis
Serum electrolytes
Anemia
Hemoglobin; iron, iron saturation, ferritin testing if indicated
Metabolic bone disease
Serum calcium, phosphate, PTH, vitamin 25(OH)D
Complications of chronic kidney disease (CKD) generally become prevalent when estimated
glomerular ﬁltration rate falls below 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 (stage G3 CKD or greater) and be-
come more common and severe as CKD progresses. Evaluation of elevated blood pressure
and volume overload should occur at every clinical contact possible; laboratory evaluations
are generally indicated every 6–12 months for stage G3 CKD, every 3–5 months for stage G4
CKD, and every 1–3 months for stage G5 CKD, or as indicated to evaluate symptoms or
changes in therapy. PTH, parathyroid hormone; 25(OH)D, 25-hydroxyvitamin D.
diabetesjournals.org/care
Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management
S223
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

trials have not been performed in this set-
ting to determine whether they improve
renal outcomes. Moreover, two long-term,
double-blind studies demonstrated no re-
noprotective effect of either ACE inhibi-
tors or ARBs among people with type 1
and type 2 diabetes who were normoten-
sive with or without high albuminuria
(formerly microalbuminuria, 30–299 mg/g
creatinine) (73,74).
It should be noted that ACE inhibitors
and ARBs are commonly not dosed at
maximum tolerated doses because of
concerns that serum creatinine will rise.
As previously noted, not maximizing
these therapies for this reason would
be considered suboptimal care. Note
that in all clinical trials demonstrating
efﬁcacy of ACE inhibitors and ARBs in
slowing kidney disease progression, the
maximum tolerated doses were used—
not very low doses that do not provide
beneﬁt. Moreover, there are now stud-
ies demonstrating outcome beneﬁts on
both mortality and slowed CKD progres-
sion in people with diabetes who have
an eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2 (75). Ad-
ditionally, when increases in serum cre-
atinine reach 30% without associated
hyperkalemia, RAS blockade should be
continued (36,76).
In the absence of kidney disease, ACE
inhibitors or ARBs are useful to manage
blood pressure but have not proven su-
perior to alternative classes of antihyper-
tensive therapy, including thiazide-like
diuretics
and
dihydropyridine
calcium
channel blockers (77). In a trial of people
with type 2 diabetes and normal urinary
albumin excretion, an ARB reduced or
suppressed the development of albumin-
uria but increased the rate of cardiovas-
cular events (78). In a trial of people with
type 1 diabetes exhibiting neither albu-
minuria nor hypertension, ACE inhibitors
or ARBs did not prevent the develop-
ment of diabetic glomerulopathy as-
sessed by kidney biopsy (73). This was
further supported by a similar trial in
people with type 2 diabetes (74).
Two clinical trials studied the combi-
nations of ACE inhibitors and ARBs and
found no beneﬁts on CVD or CKD, and
the medication combination had higher
adverse event rates (hyperkalemia and/
or AKI) (79,80). Therefore, the combined
use of ACE inhibitors and ARBs should
be avoided.
Direct Renal Effects of Glucose-
Lowering Medications
Some glucose-lowering medications also
have effects on the kidney that are di-
rect, i.e., not mediated through glycemia.
For example, SGLT2 inhibitors reduce re-
nal tubular glucose reabsorption, weight,
systemic blood pressure, intraglomerular
pressure, and albuminuria and slow GFR
loss through mechanisms that appear in-
dependent of glycemia (31,81–84). More-
over, recent data support the notion that
SGLT2 inhibitors reduce oxidative stress
in the kidney by >50% and blunt increases
in angiotensinogen as well as reduce
NLRP3 inﬂammasome activity (84–86). Glu-
cagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists
(GLP-1 RAs) also have direct effects on the
kidney and have been reported to improve
renal outcomes compared with placebo,
although a deﬁnitive resolution as to the
renoprotective effects of GLP-1 RAs is yet
to be determined (87–91). Renal effects
should be considered when selecting
agents for glucose lowering (see Section 9,
“Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic
Treatment”).
Selection of Glucose-Lowering
Medications for People With Chronic
Kidney Disease
For people with type 2 diabetes and es-
tablished CKD, special considerations for
the selection of glucose-lowering medi-
cations include limitations to available
medications when eGFR is diminished
and a desire to mitigate risks of CKD
progression,
CVD,
and
hypoglycemia
(92,93). Medication dosing may require
modiﬁcation with eGFR <60 mL/min/
1.73 m2 (1). Figure 11.2 shows the
American Diabetes Association and KDIGO
consensus recommendation algorithm
for medications in people with diabetes
and CKD.
The FDA revised its guidance for the
use of metformin in CKD in 2016 (94),
recommending use of eGFR instead of
serum creatinine to guide treatment
and expanding the pool of people with
kidney disease for whom metformin
treatment should be considered. The re-
vised FDA guidance states that 1) met-
formin is contraindicated in individuals
with an eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2, 2)
eGFR should be monitored while taking
metformin, 3) the beneﬁts and risks of
continuing treatment should be reas-
sessed when eGFR falls to <45 mL/min/
1.73 m2 (95,96), 4) metformin should
not be initiated for individuals with an
eGFR <45 mL/min/1.73 m2, and 5) met-
formin should be temporarily discontin-
ued at the time of or before iodinated
contrast imaging procedures in individu-
als with eGFR 30–60 mL/min/1.73 m2.
A number of recent studies have
shown cardiovascular protection from
SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 RAs as well as
renal protection from SGLT2 inhibitors
and possibly from GLP-1 RAs. Selection of
which glucose-lowering medications to
use should be based on the usual criteria
of an individual’s risks (cardiovascular and
renal in addition to glucose control) as
well as convenience and cost.
SGLT2 inhibitors are recommended
for people with eGFR $20 mL/min/
1.73 m2 and type 2 diabetes, as they
slow CKD progression and reduce heart
failure risk independent of glucose man-
agement (97). GLP-1 RAs are suggested
for cardiovascular risk reduction if such
risk is a predominant problem, as they
reduce risks of CVD events and hypogly-
cemia and appear to possibly slow CKD
progression (98–101).
A number of large cardiovascular out-
comes trials in people with type 2
diabetes at high risk for CVD or with ex-
isting CVD examined kidney effects as
secondary outcomes. These trials in-
clude EMPA-REG OUTCOME [BI 10773
(Empagliﬂozin) Cardiovascular Outcome
Event Trial in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
Patients], CANVAS (Canagliﬂozin Cardio-
vascular
Assessment
Study),
LEADER
(Liraglutide Effect and Action in Diabe-
tes: Evaluation of Cardiovascular Out-
come Results), and SUSTAIN-6 (Trial to
Evaluate
Cardiovascular
and
Other
Long-term Outcomes With Semaglutide
in
Subjects
With
Type
2
Diabetes)
(83,87,90,102).
Speciﬁcally,
compared
with placebo, empagliﬂozin reduced the
risk of incident or worsening nephropa-
thy (a composite of progression to
UACR >300 mg/g creatinine, doubling
of serum creatinine, ESKD, or death
from ESKD) by 39% and the risk of dou-
bling of serum creatinine accompanied
by eGFR #45 mL/min/1.73 m2 by 44%;
canagliﬂozin reduced the risk of progres-
sion of albuminuria by 27% and the risk
of reduction in eGFR, ESKD, or death
from ESKD by 40%; liraglutide reduced
the risk of new or worsening nephropa-
thy (a composite of persistent macroal-
buminuria, doubling of serum creatinine,
ESKD, or death from ESKD) by 22%; and
S224
Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

semaglutide reduced the risk of new or
worsening nephropathy (a composite of
persistent UACR >300 mg/g creatinine,
doubling of serum creatinine, or ESKD) by
36% (each P < 0.01). These analyses were
limited by evaluation of study populations
not selected primarily for CKD and examina-
tion of renal effects as secondary outcomes.
Three large clinical trials of SGLT2 in-
hibitors have focused on people with
CKD and assessment of primary renal
outcomes. Canagliﬂozin and Renal Events
in Diabetes with Established Nephropathy
Clinical Evaluation (CREDENCE), a placebo-
controlled trial of canagliﬂozin among
4,401 adults with type 2 diabetes, UACR
$300–5,000 mg/g creatinine, and eGFR
range 30–90 mL/min/1.73 m2 (mean
eGFR 56 mL/min/1.73 m2 with a mean al-
buminuria level of >900 mg/day), had a
primary composite end point of ESKD,
doubling of serum creatinine, or renal
or cardiovascular death (29,103). It was
stopped early due to positive efﬁcacy and
showed a 32% risk reduction for develop-
ment of ESKD over control (29). Addition-
ally, the development of the primary end
point, which included dialysis for $30
days, kidney transplantation or eGFR <15
mL/min/1.73 m2 sustained for $30 days
by central laboratory assessment, dou-
bling from the baseline serum creatinine
average sustained for $30 days by central
laboratory assessment, or renal death or
cardiovascular death, was reduced by
30%. This beneﬁt was on background
ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy in >99%
of the participants (29). Moreover, in
this advanced CKD group, there were
clear beneﬁts on cardiovascular out-
comes demonstrating a 31% reduction
in cardiovascular death or heart failure
hospitalization and a 20% reduction in
cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial
infarction, or nonfatal stroke (29,101,
104).
A second trial in advanced diabetic
kidney disease was the Dapagliﬂozin
and Prevention of Adverse Outcomes in
Chronic
Kidney
Disease
(DAPA-CKD)
study (105). This trial examined a cohort
similar to that in CREDENCE except
67.5% of the participants had type 2
diabetes and CKD (the other one-third
had CKD without type 2 diabetes), and
the end points were slightly different.
The primary outcome was time to the
ﬁrst occurrence of any of the compo-
nents of the composite, including $50%
sustained decline in eGFR or reaching
ESKD or cardiovascular death, or renal
death. Secondary outcome measures in-
cluded time to the ﬁrst occurrence of
any of the components of the compos-
ite kidney outcome ($50% sustained
decline in eGFR or reaching ESKD or
Healthy diet
Weight management
Smoking cessation
Physical activity
Metformin
(if eGFR ≥30)
SGLT2i
(Initiate if eGFR ≥20;
continue until dialysis
or transplant)
RAS inhibitor at maximum
tolerated dose (if HTN*)
Moderate- or
high-intensity statin
GLP-1 RA if needed to
achieve individualized
glycemic target
Nonsteroidal MRA† if 
ACR ≥30 mg/g and
normal potassium
Dihydropyridine CCB
and/or diuretic* if
needed to achieve
individualized
BP target
Antiplatelet
agent for
clinical ASCVD
Lifestyle
First-line
drug therapy
Additional
risk-based
therapy
Other glucose-lowering
drugs if needed to
achieve individualized
glycemic target
Steroidal MRA if
needed for resistant
hypertension
if eGFR ≥45
Ezetimibe, PCSK9i,
or icosapent ethyl if
indicated based on
ASCVD risk and lipids
Regular
risk factor
reassessment
(every 3–6
months)
T2D only
All patients
(T1D and T2D)
Regular reassessment
of glycemia, albuminuria,
BP, CVD risk, and lipids
Figure 11.2—Holistic approach for improving outcomes in people with diabetes and CKD. Icons presented indicate the following beneﬁts: BP cuff,
BP lowering; glucometer, glucose lowering; heart, cardioprotection; kidney, kidney protection; scale, weight management. eGFR is presented in
units of mL/min/1.73 m2. *ACEi or ARB (at maximal tolerated doses) should be ﬁrst-line therapy for hypertension when albuminuria is present.
Otherwise, dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker or diuretic can also be considered; all three classes are often needed to attain BP targets.
†Finerenone is currently the only ns-MRA with proven clinical kidney and cardiovascular beneﬁts. ACEi, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor;
ACR, albumin-to creatinine ratio; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; BP, blood pressure; CCB, cal-
cium channel blocker; CVD, cardiovascular disease; eGFR, estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist;
HTN, hypertension; MRA, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist; ns-MRA, nonsteroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist; PCSK9i, proprotein
convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 inhibitor; RAS, renin-angiotensin system; SGLT2i, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor; T1D, type 1 diabetes;
T2D, type 2 diabetes. Reprinted from de Boer et al. (1).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management
S225
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

renal death), time to the ﬁrst occur-
rence of either of the components of
the cardiovascular composite (cardio-
vascular death or hospitalization for
heart failure), and time to death from
any cause. The trial had 4,304 partici-
pants with a mean eGFR at baseline
of 43.1 ± 12.4 mL/min/1.73 m2 (range
25–75 mL/min/1.73 m2) and a median
UACR of 949 mg/g (range 200–5,000
mg/g). There was a signiﬁcant beneﬁt
by dapagliﬂozin for the primary end
point (hazard ratio [HR] 0.61 [95% CI
0.51–0.72]; P < 0.001) (105). The HR for
the kidney composite of a sustained de-
cline in eGFR of $50%, ESKD, or death
from renal causes was 0.56 (95% CI
0.45–0.68; P < 0.001). The HR for the
composite of death from cardiovascular
causes or hospitalization for heart failure
was 0.71 (95% CI 0.55–0.92; P = 0.009).
Finally, all-cause mortality was decreased
in the dapagliﬂozin group compared
with the placebo group (P < 0.004).
The most recently published clinical
trial was EMPA-KIDNEY (Study of Heart
and Kidney Protection with Empagliﬂo-
zin) (106). This study enrolled partici-
pants with kidney disease with an eGFR
of at least 20 but less than 45 mL/min/
1.73 m2 or who had an eGFR of at least
45 but less than 90 mL/min/1.73 m2
with a UACR of at least 200 mg/g creati-
nine.
Approximately
one-half of
the
6,609 participants had diabetes. The em-
pagliﬂozin-treated participants had lower
risk of progression of kidney disease and
lower risk of death from cardiovascular
causes (HR 0.72 [95% CI 0.64–0.82]; P <
0.001).
With respect to cardiovascular out-
comes, SGLT2 inhibitors have demon-
strated reduced risk of heart failure
hospitalizations and some also demon-
strated cardiovascular risk reduction.
GLP-1 RAs have clearly demonstrated
cardiovascular beneﬁts. (See Section 10,
“Cardiovascular
Disease
and
Risk
Management,”
for
further
detailed
discussion.)
Of note, while the glucose-lowering ef-
fects of SGLT2 inhibitors are blunted with
eGFR <45 mL/min/1.73 m2, the renal
and cardiovascular beneﬁts were still
seen at eGFR levels as low as 20 mL/min/
1.73 m2 even with no signiﬁcant change
in glucose (29,31,49,60,90,102,105–107).
Most participants with CKD in these trials
also had diagnosed atherosclerotic cardio-
vascular disease (ASCVD) at baseline,
although 28% of CANVAS participants
with CKD did not have diagnosed ASCVD
(32).
Based on evidence from the CRE-
DENCE, DAPA-CKD, and EMPA-KIDNEY
trials, as well as secondary analyses of
cardiovascular outcomes trials with SGLT2
inhibitors, cardiovascular and renal events
are reduced with SGLT2 inhibitor use in
individuals with an eGFR of 20 mL/min/
1.73 m2, independent of glucose-lowering
effects (101,104).
While there is clear cardiovascular
risk reduction associated with GLP-1 RA
use in people with type 2 diabetes and
CKD, the possibility for beneﬁt on renal
outcomes will come with the results of
the ongoing FLOW (A Research Study to
See How Semaglutide Works Compared
with Placebo in People With Type 2 Dia-
betes and Chronic Kidney Disease) trial
with injectable semaglutide (108). As
noted above, published data address
a limited group of people with CKD,
mostly with coexisting ASCVD. Renal
events, however, have been examined as
both primary and secondary outcomes
in large published trials. Adverse event
proﬁles of these agents also must be
considered. Please refer to Table 9.2 for
medication-speciﬁc factors, including
adverse event information, for these
agents. Additional clinical trials focus-
ing on CKD and cardiovascular out-
comes in people with CKD are ongoing
and will be reported in the next few
years.
For people with type 2 diabetes and
CKD, the selection of speciﬁc agents may
depend on comorbidity and CKD stage.
SGLT2 inhibitors are recommended for in-
dividuals at high risk of CKD progression
(i.e., with albuminuria or a history of docu-
mented eGFR loss) (Fig. 9.3). For people
with type 2 diabetes and CKD, use of
an SGLT2 inhibitor in individuals with
eGFR $20 mL/min/1.73 m2 and UACR
$200 mg/g creatinine is recommended
to reduce CKD progression and cardio-
vascular events. The reason for the
limit of eGFR is as follows. The major
clinical trials for SGLT2 inhibitors that
showed beneﬁt for people with diabetic
kidney disease are CREDENCE, DAPA-CKD,
and EMPA-KIDNEY. CREDENCE enrollment
criteria included eGFR >30 mL/min/1.73
m2 and UACR >300 mg/g (29,101).
DAPA-CKD enrolled individuals with eGFR
>25 mL/min/1.73 m2 and UACR >200
mg/g. Subgroup analyses from DAPA-CKD
(109) and analyses from the EMPEROR
heart failure trials suggest that SGLT2 in-
hibitors are safe and effective at eGFR
levels of >20 mL/min/1.73 m2. The Em-
pagliﬂozin Outcome Trial in Patients With
Chronic Heart Failure With Preserved
Ejection Fraction (EMPEROR-Preserved)
enrolled 5,998 participants (110), and the
Empagliﬂozin Outcome Trial in Patients
With Chronic Heart Failure and a Reduced
Ejection Fraction (EMPEROR-Reduced) en-
rolled 3,730 participants (111); enrollment
criteria included eGFR >60 mL/min/1.73
m2, but efﬁcacy was seen at eGFR >20
mL/min/1.73 m2 in people with heart
failure.
Most
recently,
the
EMPA-
KIDNEY trial showed efﬁcacy in participants
with eGFR as low as 20 mL/min/1.73 m2
(106). Hence, the new recommendation
is to use SGLT2 inhibitors in individuals
with eGFR as low as 20 mL/min/1.73 m2.
In addition, the DECLARE-TIMI 58 trial
suggested effectiveness in participants
with normal urinary albumin levels (112).
In sum, for people with type 2 diabetes
and diabetic kidney disease, use of an
SGLT2 inhibitor is recommended to re-
duce CKD progression and cardiovascular
events in people with an eGFR $20 mL/
min/1.73 m2.
Of note, GLP-1 RAs may also be used
at low eGFR for cardiovascular protec-
tion but may require dose adjustment
(113).
Renal and Cardiovascular Outcomes
of Mineralocorticoid Receptor
Antagonists in Chronic Kidney
Disease
MRAs historically have not been well stud-
ied in diabetic kidney disease because of
the risk of hyperkalemia (114,115). How-
ever, data that do exist suggest sustained
beneﬁt on albuminuria reduction. There
are two different classes of MRAs, steroi-
dal and nonsteroidal, with one group not
extrapolatable to the other (116). Late in
2020, the results of the ﬁrst of two trials,
the Finerenone in Reducing Kidney Failure
and Disease Progression in Diabetic Kidney
Disease (FIDELIO-DKD) trial, which exam-
ined the renal effects of ﬁnerenone,
demonstrated a signiﬁcant reduction in
diabetic kidney disease progression and
cardiovascular events in people with ad-
vanced diabetic kidney disease (33,117).
This trial had a primary end point of time
to ﬁrst occurrence of the composite end
point of onset of kidney failure, a sus-
tained decrease of eGFR >40% from
S226
Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

baseline over at least 4 weeks, or renal
death. A prespeciﬁed secondary outcome
was time to ﬁrst occurrence of the com-
posite end point of cardiovascular death
or nonfatal cardiovascular events (myocar-
dial infarction, stroke, or hospitalization
for heart failure). Other secondary out-
comes included all-cause mortality, time
to all-cause hospitalizations, and change
in UACR from baseline to month 4, and
time to ﬁrst occurrence of the following
composite end point: onset of kidney
failure, a sustained decrease in eGFR
of $57% from baseline over at least
4 weeks, or renal death.
The double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial randomized 5,734 people with CKD
and type 2 diabetes to receive ﬁnere-
none, a nonsteroidal MRA, or placebo.
Eligible participants had a UACR of 30
to <300 mg/g, an eGFR of 25 to <60
mL/min/1.73 m2, and diabetic retinopa-
thy, or a UACR of 300–5,000 mg/g and
an eGFR of 25 to <75 mL/min/1.73 m2.
The potassium level had to be #4.8
mmol/L. The mean age of participants
was 65.6 years, and 30% were female.
The mean eGFR was 44.3 mL/min/
1.73 m2, and the mean albuminuria was
852 mg/g (interquartile range 446–1,634
mg/g). The primary end point was re-
duced with ﬁnerenone compared with
placebo (HR 0.82 [95% CI 0.73–0.93]; P =
0.001), as was the key secondary compos-
ite of cardiovascular outcomes (HR 0.86
[95% CI 0.75–0.99]; P = 0.03). Hyperkale-
mia resulted in 2.3% discontinuation in
the study group compared with 0.9% in
the placebo group. However, the study
was completed, and there were no deaths
related to hyperkalemia. Of note, 4.5% of
the total group were being treated with
SGLT2 inhibitors.
The Finerenone in Reducing Cardiovas-
cular Mortality and Morbidity in Diabetic
Kidney Disease (FIGARO-DKD) trial assessed
the safety and efﬁcacy of ﬁnerenone in re-
ducing cardiovascular events among people
with type 2 diabetes and CKD with ele-
vated UACR (30 to <300 mg/g creatinine)
and eGFR 25–90 mL/min/1.73 m2 (118).
The potassium level had to be #4.8 mmol/L.
The study randomized eligible subjects to
either ﬁnerenone (n = 3,686) or placebo
(n = 3,666). Participants with an eGFR of
25–60 mL/min/1.73 m2 at the screening
visit received an initial dose at baseline of
10 mg once daily, and if eGFR at screening
was $60 mL/min/1.73 m2, the initial dose
was 20 mg once daily. An increase in the
dose from 10 to 20 mg once daily was en-
couraged after 1 month, provided the se-
rum potassium level was #4.8 mmol/L
and eGFR was stable. The mean age of
participants was 64.1 years (31% were fe-
male), and the median follow-up duration
was 3.4 years. The median A1C was
7.7%, the mean systolic blood pressure
was 136 mmHg, and the mean GFR was
67.8 mL/min/1.73 m2. People with heart
failure with a reduced ejection fraction
and
uncontrolled
hypertension
were
excluded.
The primary composite outcome was
cardiovascular death, myocardial infarc-
tion, stroke, and hospitalization for heart
failure. The ﬁnerenone group showed a
13% reduction in the primary end point
compared with the placebo group (12.4%
vs. 14.2%; HR 0.87 [95% CI 0.76–0.98];
P = 0.03). This beneﬁt was primarily
driven by a reduction in heart failure hos-
pitalizations: 3.2% vs. 4.4% in the placebo
group (HR 0.71 [95% CI 0.56–0.90]).
Of the secondary outcomes, the most
noteworthy was a 36% reduction in
ESKD: 0.9% vs. 1.3% in the placebo group
(HR 0.64 [95% CI 0.41–0.995]). There was
a higher incidence of hyperkalemia in
the ﬁnerenone group, 10.8% vs. 5.3%, al-
though only 1.2% of the 3,686 individuals
on ﬁnerenone stopped the study due to
hyperkalemia.
The FIDELITY prespeciﬁed pooled efﬁ-
cacy and safety analysis incorporated in-
dividuals from both the FIGARO-DKD
and FIDELIO-DKD trials (N = 13,171) to
allow for evaluation across the spec-
trum of severity of CKD, since the popu-
lations were different (with a slight
overlap) and the study designs were
similar (119). The analysis showed a
14% reduction in composite cardiovas-
cular death, nonfatal myocardial infarc-
tion, nonfatal stroke, and hospitalization
for heart failure for ﬁnerenone vs. pla-
cebo (12.7% vs. 14.4%; HR 0.86 [95% CI
0.78–0.95]; P = 0.0018).
It also demonstrated a 23% reduction
in the composite kidney outcome, con-
sisting of sustained $57% decrease in
eGFR from baseline over $4 weeks, or
renal death, for ﬁnerenone vs. placebo
(5.5% vs. 7.1%; HR 0.77 [95% CI 0.67–
0.88]; P = 0.0002).
The pooled FIDELITY trial analysis
conﬁrms and strengthens the positive
cardiovascular and renal outcomes with
ﬁnerenone across the spectrum of CKD,
irrespective of baseline ASCVD history
(with the exclusion of those with heart
failure with reduced ejection fraction).
REFERRAL TO A NEPHROLOGIST
Health care professionals should con-
sider referral to a nephrologist if the in-
dividual with diabetes has continuously
rising UACR levels and/or continuously
declining eGFR, if there is uncertainty
about the etiology of kidney disease, for
difﬁcult management issues (anemia,
secondary hyperparathyroidism, signiﬁ-
cant increases in albuminuria in spite of
good blood pressure management, met-
abolic bone disease, resistant hyperten-
sion, or electrolyte disturbances), or
when there is advanced kidney disease
(eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2) requiring
discussion of renal replacement therapy
for ESKD (1). The threshold for referral
may vary depending on the frequency
with which a health care professional
encounters people with diabetes and
kidney disease. Consultation with a ne-
phrologist when stage 4 CKD develops
(eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2) has been
found to reduce cost, improve quality of
care, and delay dialysis (120).
However, other specialists and health
care professionals should also educate
people with diabetes about the progres-
sive nature of CKD, the kidney preserva-
tion beneﬁts of proactive treatment of
blood pressure and blood glucose, and
the potential need for renal replace-
ment therapy.
References
1. de Boer IH, Khunti K, Sadusky T, et al. Dia-
betes management in chronic kidney disease: a
consensus report by the American Diabetes
Association (ADA) and Kidney Disease: Improving
Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Diabetes Care 2022;
45:3075–3090
2. Afkarian M, Zelnick LR, Hall YN, et al. Clinical
manifestations of kidney disease among US
adults with diabetes, 1988-2014. JAMA 2016;
316:602–610
3. de Boer IH, Rue TC, Hall YN, Heagerty PJ,
Weiss NS, Himmelfarb J. Temporal trends in the
prevalence of diabetic kidney disease in the
United States. JAMA 2011;305:2532–2539
4. DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Kidney disease
and related ﬁndings in the Diabetes Control and
Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes
Interventions and Complications study. Diabetes
Care 2014;37:24–30
5. Johansen KL, Chertow GM, Foley RN, et al. US
Renal Data System 2020 annual data report:
epidemiology of kidney disease in the United
States. Am J Kidney Dis 2021;77(Suppl. 1):A7–A8
6. Fox CS, Matsushita K, Woodward M, et al.;
Chronic Kidney Disease Prognosis Consortium.
Associations of kidney disease measures with
diabetesjournals.org/care
Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management
S227
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

mortality
and
end-stage
renal
disease
in
individuals with and without diabetes: a meta-
analysis. Lancet 2012;380:1662–1673
7. Yarnoff BO, Hoerger TJ, Simpson SK, et al.;
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CKD
Initiative. The cost-effectiveness of using chronic
kidney disease risk scores to screen for early-
stage chronic kidney disease. BMC Nephrol 2017;
18:85
8. Coresh J, Heerspink HJL, Sang Y, et al.; Chronic
Kidney Disease Prognosis Consortium and Chronic
Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration.
Change in albuminuria and subsequent risk
of end-stage kidney disease: an individual
participant-level consortium meta-analysis of
observational studies. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
2019;7:115–127
9. Levey AS, Gansevoort RT, Coresh J, et al.
Change in albuminuria and GFR as end points for
clinical trials in early stages of CKD: a scientiﬁc
workshop sponsored by the National Kidney
Foundation in collaboration with the US Food
and Drug Administration and European Medicines
Agency. Am J Kidney Dis 2020;75:84–104
10. Afkarian M, Sachs MC, Kestenbaum B, et al.
Kidney disease and increased mortality risk in
type 2 diabetes. J Am Soc Nephrol 2013;24:
302–308
11. Groop PH, Thomas MC, Moran JL, et al.;
FinnDiane Study Group. The presence and
severity of chronic kidney disease predicts all-
cause mortality in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes
2009;58:1651–1658
12. Gomes MB, Gonc¸alves MF. Is there a
physiological variability for albumin excretion
rate? Study in patients with diabetes type 1 and
non-diabetic individuals. Clin Chim Acta 2001;
304:117–123
13. Naresh CN, Hayen A, Weening A, Craig JC,
Chadban SJ. Day-to-day variability in spot urine
albumin-creatinine ratio. Am J Kidney Dis 2013;
62:1095–1101
14. Tankeu AT, Kaze FF, Noubiap JJ, Chelo D,
Dehayem MY, Sobngwi E. Exercise-induced
albuminuria and circadian blood pressure abnor-
malities in type 2 diabetes. World J Nephrol
2017;6:209–216
15. Delanaye P, Glassock RJ, Pottel H, Rule AD.
An age-calibrated deﬁnition of chronic kidney
disease: rationale and beneﬁts. Clin Biochem Rev
2016;37:17–26
16. Kramer HJ, Nguyen QD, Curhan G, Hsu CY.
Renal insufﬁciency in the absence of albuminuria
and retinopathy among adults with type 2
diabetes mellitus. JAMA 2003;289:3273–3277
17. Inker LA, Eneanya ND, Coresh J, et al.;
Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collabo-
ration. New creatinine- and cystatin C-based
equations to estimate GFR without race. N Engl J
Med 2021;385:1737–1749
18. Miller WG, Kaufman HW, Levey AS, et al.
National Kidney Foundation Laboratory Engage-
ment Working Group recommendations for
implementing the CKD-EPI 2021 race-free equa-
tions for estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate:
practical guidance for clinical laboratories. Clin
Chem 2022;68:511–520
19. Molitch ME, Steffes M, Sun W, et al.;
Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and
Complications Study Group. Development and
progression of renal insufﬁciency with and
without albuminuria in adults with type 1
diabetes in the Diabetes Control and Comp-
lications Trial and the Epidemiology of Diabetes
Interventions and Complications study. Diabetes
Care 2010;33:1536–1543
20. He F, Xia X,Wu XF,Yu XQ, Huang FX. Diabetic
retinopathy in predicting diabetic nephropathy in
patients with type 2 diabetes and renal disease: a
meta-analysis. Diabetologia 2013;56:457–466
21. Vistisen D, Andersen GS, Hulman A, Persson
F, Rossing P, Jørgensen ME. Progressive decline in
estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate in patients
with diabetes after moderate loss in kidney
function-even without albuminuria. Diabetes
Care 2019;42:1886–1894
22. Levey AS, Coresh J, Balk E, et al.; National
Kidney Foundation. National Kidney Foundation
practice guidelines for chronic kidney disease:
evaluation, classiﬁcation, and stratiﬁcation. Ann
Intern Med 2003;139:137–147
23. Matzke GR, Aronoff GR, Atkinson AJ Jr, et al.
Drug dosing consideration in patients with acute
and chronic kidney disease-a clinical update from
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes
(KDIGO). Kidney Int 2011;80:1122–1137
24. Coresh J, Turin TC, Matsushita K, et al.
Decline in estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate
and subsequent risk of end-stage renal disease
and mortality. JAMA 2014;311:2518–2531
25. Vassalotti JA, Centor R, Turner BJ, Greer RC,
Choi M; National Kidney Foundation Kidney
Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative. Practical
approach to detection and management of
chronic kidney disease for the primary care
clinician. Am J Med 2016;129:153–162.e7
26. Zhou J, Liu Y, Tang Y, et al. A comparison of
RIFLE, AKIN, KDIGO, and Cys-C criteria for the
deﬁnition of acute kidney injury in critically ill
patients. Int Urol Nephrol 2016;48:125–132
27. Hoste EAJ, Kellum JA, Selby NM, et al. Global
epidemiology and outcomes of acute kidney
injury. Nat Rev Nephrol 2018;14:607–625
28. James MT, Grams ME, Woodward M, et al.;
CKD Prognosis Consortium. A meta-analysis of
the association of estimated GFR, albuminuria,
diabetes mellitus, and hypertension with acute
kidney injury. Am J Kidney Dis 2015;66:602–612
29. Perkovic V, Jardine MJ, Neal B, et al.;
CREDENCE Trial Investigators. Canagliﬂozin and
renal outcomes in type 2 diabetes and nephro-
pathy. N Engl J Med 2019;380:2295–2306
30. Nadkarni GN, Ferrandino R, Chang A, et al.
Acute kidney injury in patients on SGLT2 in-
hibitors: a propensity-matched analysis. Diabetes
Care 2017;40:1479–1485
31. Wanner C, Inzucchi SE, Lachin JM, et al.;
EMPA-REG OUTCOME Investigators. Empagliﬂozin
and progression of kidney disease in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2016;375:323–334
32. Neuen BL, Ohkuma T, Neal B, et al. Cardio-
vascular and renal outcomes with canagliﬂozin
according to baseline kidney function. Circulation
2018;138:1537–1550
33. Bakris GL, Agarwal R, Anker SD, et al.;
FIDELIO-DKD Investigators. Effect of ﬁnerenone
on chronic kidney disease outcomes in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2020;383:2219–2229
34. Thakar CV, Christianson A, Himmelfarb J,
Leonard AC. Acute kidney injury episodes and
chronic kidney disease risk in diabetes mellitus.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2011;6:2567–2572
35. Bakris GL, Weir MR. Angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor-associated elevations in serum
creatinine: is this a cause for concern? Arch
Intern Med 2000;160:685–693
36. Collard D, Brouwer TF, Peters RJG, Vogt L,
van den Born BH. Creatinine rise during blood
pressure therapy and the risk of adverse clinical
outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Hypertension 2018;72:1337–1344
37. Malhotra R, Craven T, Ambrosius WT, et al.;
SPRINT Research Group. Effects of intensive
blood pressure lowering on kidney tubule injury
in CKD: a longitudinal subgroup analysis in SPRINT.
Am J Kidney Dis 2019;73:21–30
38. Hughes-Austin JM, Rifkin DE, Beben T, et al.
The relation of serum potassium concentration
with
cardiovascular
events
and
mortality
in
community-living individuals. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
2017;12:245–252
39. Bandak G, Sang Y, Gasparini A, et al.
Hyperkalemia after initiating renin-angiotensin
system
blockade:
the
Stockholm
Creatinine
Measurements (SCREAM) project. J Am Heart
Assoc 2017;6:e005428
40. Nilsson E, Gasparini A, €Arnl€ov J, et al.
Incidence and determinants of hyperkalemia and
hypokalemia in a large healthcare system. Int J
Cardiol 2017;245:277–284
41. Zelniker TA, Raz I, Mosenzon O, et al. Effect
of dapagliﬂozin on cardiovascular outcomes
according to
baseline
kidney function
and
albuminuria status in patients with type 2
diabetes: a prespeciﬁed secondary analysis of a
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol 2021;
6:801–810
42. Epstein M, Reaven NL, Funk SE, McGaughey
KJ, Oestreicher N, Knispel J. Evaluation of the
treatment gap between clinical guidelines and
the utilization of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
system inhibitors. Am J Manag Care 2015;
21(Suppl.):S212–S220
43. de Boer IH, Gao X, Cleary PA, et al.; Diabetes
Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of
Diabetes Interventions and Complications (DCCT/
EDIC) Research Group. Albuminuria changes and
cardiovascular and renal outcomes in type 1
diabetes: the DCCT/EDIC study. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2016;11:1969–1977
44. Sumida K, Molnar MZ, Potukuchi PK, et al.
Changes in albuminuria and subsequent risk of
incident kidney disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
2017;12:1941–1949
45. Klahr S, Levey AS, Beck GJ, et al.; Modi-
ﬁcation of Diet in Renal Disease Study Group.The
effects of dietary protein restriction and blood-
pressure control on the progression of chronic
renal disease. N Engl J Med 1994;330:877–
884
46. Mills KT, Chen J,Yang W, et al.; Chronic Renal
Insufﬁciency Cohort (CRIC) Study Investigators.
Sodium excretion and the risk of cardiovascular
disease in patients with chronic kidney disease.
JAMA 2016;315:2200–2210
47. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al.
2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/
ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention,
detection, evaluation, and management of high
blood pressure in adults: executive summary: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical
Practice
Guidelines.
Hypertension
2018;71:
1269–1324
48. Murray DP, Young L, Waller J, et al. Is dietary
protein intake predictive of 1-year mortality
S228
Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

in dialysis patients? Am J Med Sci 2018;356:
234–243
49. DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Effect of in-
tensive diabetes treatment on albuminuria in
type 1 diabetes: long-term follow-up of the
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial and
Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and
Complications study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
2014;2:793–800
50. de Boer IH, Sun W, Cleary PA, et al.; DCCT/
EDIC Research Group. Intensive diabetes therapy
and glomerular ﬁltration rate in type 1 diabetes.
N Engl J Med 2011;365:2366–2376
51. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS)
Group. Intensive blood-glucose control with
sulphonylureas or insulin compared with conven-
tional treatment and risk of complications in
patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 33). Lancet
1998;352:837–853
52. Patel A, MacMahon S, Chalmers J, et al.;
ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Intensive blood
glucose
control
and
vascular
outcomes
in
patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med
2008;358:2560–2572
53. Ismail-Beigi F, Craven T, Banerji MA, et al.;
ACCORD trial group. Effect of intensive treatment
of hyperglycaemia on microvascular outcomes in
type 2 diabetes: an analysis of the ACCORD
randomised trial. Lancet 2010;376:419–430
54. Zoungas S, Chalmers J, Neal B, et al.;
ADVANCE-ON Collaborative Group. Follow-up
of blood-pressure lowering and glucose control
in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2014;371:
1392–1406
55. Zoungas S, Arima H, Gerstein HC, et al.;
Collaborators on Trials of Lowering Glucose
(CONTROL) group. Effects of intensive glucose
control on microvascular outcomes in patients
with type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis of individual
participant data from randomised controlled trials.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;5:431–437
56. Agrawal L, Azad N, Bahn GD, et al.; VADT
Study Group. Long-term follow-up of intensive
glycaemic control on renal outcomes in the
Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial (VADT). Diabe-
tologia 2018;61:295–299
57. Papademetriou V, Lovato L, Doumas M,
et al.; ACCORD Study Group. Chronic kidney
disease and intensive glycemic control increase
cardiovascular risk in patients with type 2
diabetes. Kidney Int 2015;87:649–659
58. Perkovic V, Heerspink HL, Chalmers J, et al.;
ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Intensive glucose
control improves kidney outcomes in patients
with type 2 diabetes. Kidney Int 2013;83:
517–523
59. Wong MG, Perkovic V, Chalmers J, et al.;
ADVANCE-ON Collaborative Group. Long-term
beneﬁts of intensive glucose control for pre-
venting end-stage kidney disease: ADVANCE-ON.
Diabetes Care 2016;39:694–700
60. National Kidney Foundation. KDOQI clinical
practice guideline for diabetes and CKD: 2012
update. Am J Kidney Dis 2012;60:850–886
61. Leehey DJ, Zhang JH, Emanuele NV, et al.; VA
NEPHRON-D Study Group. BP and renal out-
comes in diabetic kidney disease: the Veterans
Affairs Nephropathy in Diabetes Trial. Clin J Am
Soc Nephrol 2015;10:2159–2169
62. Emdin CA, Rahimi K, Neal B, Callender T,
Perkovic V, Patel A. Blood pressure lowering in
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. JAMA 2015;313:603–615
63. Cushman WC, Evans GW, Byington RP, et al.;
ACCORD Study Group. Effects of intensive blood-
pressure control in type 2 diabetes mellitus. N
Engl J Med 2010;362:1575–1585
64. UK Prospective Diabetes Study Group. Tight
blood pressure control and risk of macrovascular
and microvascular complications in type 2
diabetes: UKPDS 38. BMJ 1998;317:703–713
65. de Boer IH, Bangalore S, Benetos A, et al.
Diabetes and hypertension: a position statement
by the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes
Care 2017;40:1273–1284
66. Brenner BM, Cooper ME, de Zeeuw D, et al.;
RENAAL Study Investigators. Effects of losartan
on renal and cardiovascular outcomes in patients
with type 2 diabetes and nephropathy. N Engl J
Med 2001;345:861–869
67. Lewis EJ, Hunsicker LG, Bain RP; The Collabo-
rative Study Group. The effect of angiotensin-
converting-enzyme
inhibition
on
diabetic
nephropathy. N Engl J Med 1993;329:1456–1462
68. Lewis EJ, Hunsicker LG, Clarke WR, et al.;
Collaborative Study Group. Renoprotective effect
of the angiotensin-receptor antagonist irbesartan
in patients with nephropathy due to type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2001;345:851–860
69. Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study
Investigators. Effects of ramipril on cardiovascular
and microvascular outcomes in people with
diabetes mellitus: results of the HOPE study and
MICRO-HOPE substudy. Lancet 2000;355:253–259
70. Barnett AH, Bain SC, Bouter P, et al.;
Diabetics Exposed to Telmisartan and Enalapril
Study
Group.
Angiotensin-receptor
blockade
versus converting-enzyme inhibition in type 2
diabetes and nephropathy. N Engl J Med 2004;
351:1952–1961
71. Wu HY, Peng CL, Chen PC, et al. Comparative
effectiveness of angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors versus angiotensin II receptor blockers
for major renal outcomes in patients with dia-
betes: a 15-year cohort study. PLoS One 2017;
12:e0177654
72. Parving HH, Lehnert H, Br€ochner-Mortensen
J, Gomis R, Andersen S; Irbesartan in Patients
with Type 2 Diabetes and Microalbuminuria
Study Group. The effect of irbesartan on the
development of diabetic nephropathy in patients
with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2001;345:
870–878
73. Mauer M, Zinman B, Gardiner R, et al. Renal
and retinal effects of enalapril and losartan in
type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2009;361:40–51
74. Weil EJ, Fufaa G, Jones LI, et al. Effect of
losartan on prevention and progression of early
diabetic nephropathy in American Indians with
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 2013;62:3224–3231
75. Qiao Y, Shin J-I, Chen TK, et al. Association
between
renin-angiotensin
system
blockade
discontinuation and all-cause mortality among
persons with low estimated glomerular ﬁltration
rate. JAMA Intern Med 2020;180:718–726
76. Ohkuma T, Jun M, Rodgers A, et al.;
ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Acute increases
in serum creatinine after starting angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitor-based therapy and
effects of its continuation on major clinical
outcomes in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Hyper-
tension 2019;73:84–91
77. Bangalore S, Fakheri R, Toklu B, Messerli FH.
Diabetes mellitus as a compelling indication
for use of renin angiotensin system blockers:
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
trials. BMJ 2016;352:i438
78. Haller H, Ito S, Izzo JL Jr, et al.; ROADMAP
Trial Investigators. Olmesartan for the delay or
prevention
of
microalbuminuria
in
type
2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2011;364:907–917
79. Yusuf S, Teo KK, Pogue J, et al.; ONTARGET
Investigators. Telmisartan, ramipril, or both in
patients at high risk for vascular events. N Engl J
Med 2008;358:1547–1559
80. Fried LF, Emanuele N, Zhang JH, et al.; VA
NEPHRON-D
Investigators.
Combined
angio-
tensin inhibition for the treatment of diabetic
nephropathy. N Engl J Med 2013;369:1892–1903
81. Cherney DZ, Perkins BA, Soleymanlou N,
et al. Renal hemodynamic effect of sodium-
glucose cotransporter 2 inhibition in patients
with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Circulation 2014;
129:587–597
82. Heerspink HJ, Desai M, Jardine M, Balis D,
Meininger G, Perkovic V. Canagliﬂozin slows
progression of renal function decline indepen-
dently of glycemic effects. J Am Soc Nephrol
2017;28:368–375
83. Neal B, Perkovic V, Mahaffey KW, et al.;
CANVAS Program Collaborative Group. Canagliﬂozin
and cardiovascular and renal events in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;377:644–657
84. Zelniker TA, Braunwald E. Cardiac and renal
effects
of
sodium-glucose
co-transporter
2
inhibitors
in
diabetes:
JACC
state-of-the-art
review. J Am Coll Cardiol 2018;72:1845–1855
85. Woods TC, Satou R, Miyata K, et al.
Canagliﬂozin prevents intrarenal angiotensinogen
augmentation and mitigates kidney injury and
hypertension in mouse model of type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Am J Nephrol 2019;49:331–342
86. Heerspink HJL, Perco P, Mulder S, et al.
Canagliﬂozin reduces inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis
biomarkers: a potential mechanism of action
for beneﬁcial effects of SGLT2 inhibitors in
diabetic kidney disease. Diabetologia 2019;62:
1154–1166
87. Marso SP, Daniels GH, Brown-Frandsen K,
et al.; LEADER Steering Committee; LEADER Trial
Investigators. Liraglutide and cardiovascular out-
comes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2016;
375:311–322
88. Cooper ME, Perkovic V, McGill JB, et al.
Kidney disease end points in a pooled analysis of
individual patient-level data from a large clinical
trials program of the dipeptidyl peptidase 4
inhibitor linagliptin in type 2 diabetes. Am J
Kidney Dis 2015;66:441–449
89. Mann JFE, Ørsted DD, Brown-Frandsen K,
et al.; LEADER Steering Committee and Investi-
gators. Liraglutide and renal outcomes in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;377:839–848
90. Marso SP, Bain SC, Consoli A, et al.; SUSTAIN-6
Investigators. Semaglutide and cardiovascular out-
comes in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J
Med 2016;375:1834–1844
91. Shaman AM, Bain SC, Bakris GL, et al. Effect
of the glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists
semaglutide and liraglutide on kidney outcomes
in patients with type 2 diabetes: pooled analysis
of SUSTAIN 6 and LEADER. Circulation 2022;
145:575–585
diabetesjournals.org/care
Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management
S229
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

92. Karter AJ, Warton EM, Lipska KJ, et al.
Development and validation of a tool to identify
patients with type 2 diabetes at high risk of
hypoglycemia-related
emergency
department
or hospital use. JAMA Intern Med 2017;177:
1461–1470
93. Moen MF, Zhan M, Hsu VD, et al. Frequency
of hypoglycemia and its signiﬁcance in chronic
kidney disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2009;
4:1121–1127
94. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA
drug
safety
communication:
FDA
revises
warnings regarding use of the diabetes medicine
metformin in certain patients with reduced
kidney function, 2017. Accessed 24 September
2023.
Available
from
https://www.fda.gov/
drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-drug
-safety-communication-fda-revises-warnings
-regarding-use-diabetes-medicine-metformin
-certain
95. Lalau JD, Kajbaf F, Bennis Y, Hurtel-Lemaire
AS, Belpaire F, De Broe ME. Metformin treatment
in patients with type 2 diabetes and chronic
kidney disease stages 3A, 3B, or 4. Diabetes Care
2018;41:547–553
96. Chu PY, Hackstadt AJ, Chipman J, et al.
Hospitalization for lactic acidosis among patients
with reduced kidney function treated with
metformin or sulfonylureas. Diabetes Care 2020;
43:1462–1470
97. McGuire DK, Shih WJ, Cosentino F, et al.
Association of SGLT2 inhibitors with cardio-
vascular and kidney outcomes in patients with
type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. JAMA Cardiol
2021;6:148–158
98. Zelniker TA, Wiviott SD, Raz I, et al.
Comparison of the effects of glucagon-like
peptide receptor agonists and sodium-glucose
cotransporter 2 inhibitors for prevention of
major adverse cardiovascular and renal out-
comes in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Circulation
2019;139:2022–2031
99. Mann JFE, Hansen T, Idorn T, et al. Effects of
once-weekly subcutaneous semaglutide on kidney
function and safety in patients with type 2
diabetes: a post-hoc analysis of the SUSTAIN 1-7
randomised controlled trials. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol 2020;8:880–893
100. Mann JFE, Muskiet MHA. Incretin-based
drugs and the kidney in type 2 diabetes: choosing
between DPP-4 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor
agonists. Kidney Int 2021;99:314–318
101. Bakris GL. Major advancements in slowing
diabetic kidney disease progression: focus on
SGLT2 inhibitors. Am J Kidney Dis 2019;74:573–575
102. Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, et al.;
EMPA-REG OUTCOME Investigators. Empagliﬂozin,
cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2015;373:2117–2128
103. Jardine MJ, Mahaffey KW, Neal B, et al.;
CREDENCE study investigators. The Canagliﬂozin
and Renal Endpoints in Diabetes with Established
Nephropathy
Clinical
Evaluation
(CREDENCE)
study rationale, design, and baseline chara-
cteristics. Am J Nephrol 2017;46:462–472
104. Mahaffey KW, Jardine MJ, Bompoint S,
et al. Canagliﬂozin and cardiovascular and renal
outcomes in type 2 diabetes mellitus and chronic
kidney disease in primary and secondary cardio-
vascular prevention groups. Circulation 2019;140:
739–750
105. Heerspink HJL, Stefansson BV, Correa-
Rotter R, et al.; DAPA-CKD Trial Committees and
Investigators.
Dapagliﬂozin
in
patients
with
chronic kidney disease. N Engl J Med 2020;383:
1436–1446
106. Herrington WG, Staplin N, Wanner C,
et al.; The EMPA-KIDNEY Collaborative Group.
Empagliﬂozin in patients with chronic kidney
disease. N Engl J Med 2023;388:117–127
107. Wiviott SD, Raz I, Bonaca MP, et al.;
DECLARE–TIMI 58 Investigators. Dapagliﬂozin
and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes.
N Engl J Med 2019;380:347–357
108. Novo Nordisk A/S. A research study to see
how semaglutide works compared to placebo in
people with type 2 diabetes and chronic kidney
disease (FLOW). In: ClinicalTrials.gov. Bethesda,
MD,
National
Library
of
Medicine,
2019.
Accessed 24 September 2023. Available from
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03819153
109. Chertow GM, Vart P, Jongs N, et al.; DAPA-
CKD Trial Committees and Investigators. Effects
of dapagliﬂozin in stage 4 chronic kidney disease.
J Am Soc Nephrol 2021;32:2352–2361
110. Anker SD, Butler J, Filippatos G, et al.;
EMPEROR-Preserved Trial Investigators. Empagliﬂozin
in heart failure with a preserved ejection fraction.
N Engl J Med 2021;385:1451–1461
111. Packer M, Anker SD, Butler J, et al.; EMPEROR-
Reduced Trial Investigators. Cardiovascular and renal
outcomes with empagliﬂozin in heart failure. N Engl
J Med 2020;383:1413–1424
112. Mosenzon O, Wiviott SD, Heerspink HJL,
et al. The effect of dapagliﬂozin on albuminuria
in DECLARE-TIMI 58. Diabetes Care 2021;44:
1805–1815
113. Romera
I,
Cebrian-Cuenca
A,
Alvarez-
Guisasola F, Gomez-Peralta F, Reviriego J. A
review of practical issues on the use of glucagon-
like peptide-1 receptor agonists for the manage-
ment of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Ther 2019;10:
5–19
114. Bomback AS, Kshirsagar AV, Amamoo MA,
Klemmer PJ. Change in proteinuria after adding
aldosterone blockers to ACE inhibitors or angio-
tensin receptor blockers in CKD: a systematic
review. Am J Kidney Dis 2008;51:199–211
115. Saraﬁdis P, Papadopoulos CE, Kamperidis V,
Giannakoulas G, Doumas M. Cardiovascular
protection with sodium-glucose cotransporter-2
inhibitors and mineralocorticoid receptor an-
tagonists in chronic kidney disease: a milestone
achieved. Hypertension 2021;77:1442–1455
116. Agarwal R, Kolkhof P, Bakris G, et al.
Steroidal and non-steroidal mineralocorticoid
receptor antagonists in cardiorenal medicine. Eur
Heart J 2021;42:152–161
117. Filippatos G, Anker SD, Agarwal R, et al.;
FIDELIO-DKD
Investigators.
Finerenone
and
cardiovascular outcomes in patients with chronic
kidney disease and type 2 diabetes. Circulation
2021;143:540–552
118. Pitt B, Filippatos G, Agarwal R, et al.;
FIGARO-DKD Investigators. Cardiovascular events
with ﬁnerenone in kidney disease and type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2021;385:2252–2263
119. Agarwal R, Filippatos G, Pitt B, et al.;
FIDELIO-DKD
and
FIGARO-DKD
investigators.
Cardiovascular
and
kidney
outcomes
with
ﬁnerenone in patients with type 2 diabetes and
chronic kidney disease: the FIDELITY pooled
analysis. Eur Heart J 2022;43:474–484
120. Smart NA, Dieberg G, Ladhani M, Titus T.
Early referral to specialist nephrology services for
preventing the progression to end-stage kidney
disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;6:
CD007333
S230
Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

12. Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and
Foot Care: Standards of Care in
Diabetes—2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S231–S243 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S012
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” in-
cludes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to
provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guide-
lines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional
Practice Committee, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for
updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a
detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the
evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full
list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction
and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are
invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
For prevention and management of diabetes complications in children and adoles-
cents, please refer to Section 14, “Children and Adolescents.”
DIABETIC RETINOPATHY
Recommendations
12.1 Implement strategies to help people with diabetes reach glycemic goals
to reduce the risk or slow the progression of diabetic retinopathy. A
12.2 Implement strategies to help people with diabetes reach blood pressure and
lipid goals to reduce the risk or slow the progression of diabetic retinopathy. A
Diabetic retinopathy is a highly speciﬁc neurovascular complication of both type 1
and type 2 diabetes, with prevalence strongly related to both the duration of diabe-
tes and the level of glycemic control (1). Diabetic retinopathy is the most frequent
cause of new cases of blindness among adults aged 20–74 years in developed coun-
tries. Glaucoma, cataracts, and other eye disorders occur earlier and more frequently
in people with diabetes.
In addition to diabetes duration, factors that increase the risk of, or are associated
with, retinopathy include chronic hyperglycemia (2,3), nephropathy (4), hypertension
(5), and dyslipidemia (6). Intensive diabetes management with the goal of achieving
near-normoglycemia has been shown in large prospective randomized studies to pre-
vent and/or delay the onset and progression of diabetic retinopathy, reduce the
need for future ocular surgical procedures, and potentially improve self-reported vi-
sual function (2,7–10). A meta-analysis of data from cardiovascular outcomes studies
showed no association between glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist (GLP-1 RA)
treatment and retinopathy per se, except through the association between retinopa-
thy and average A1C reduction at the 3-month and 1-year follow-up. Long-term
*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Associ-
ation Professional Practice Committee. 12. Retino-
pathy, neuropathy, and foot care: Standards of
Care in Diabetes—2024. Diabetes Care 2024;47
(Suppl. 1):S231–S243
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
12. RETINOPATHY, NEUROPATHY, AND FOOT CARE
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
S231
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

impact of improved glycemic control on
retinopathy was not studied in these tri-
als. However, GLP-1 RAs including lira-
glutide, semaglutide, and dulaglutide
have been shown to be associated
with an increased risk of rapidly wors-
ening diabetic retinopathy in random-
ized trials. Further data from clinical
studies with longer follow-up purposefully
designed for diabetic retinopathy risk as-
sessment, particularly including individu-
als with established diabetic retinopathy,
are warranted. Retinopathy status should
be assessed when intensifying glucose-
lowering therapies such as those using
GLP-1 RAs, since rapid reductions in A1C
can be associated with initial worsen-
ing of retinopathy (11).
Screening
Recommendations
12.3 Adults with type 1 diabetes should
have an initial dilated and comprehen-
sive eye examination by an ophthalmol-
ogist or optometrist within 5 years after
the onset of diabetes. B
12.4 People with type 2 diabetes
should have an initial dilated and
comprehensive eye examination by
an ophthalmologist or optometrist at
the time of the diabetes diagnosis. B
12.5 If there is no evidence of retinopa-
thy from one or more annual eye ex-
ams and glycemic indicators are within
the goal range, then screening every
1–2 years may be considered. If any
level of diabetic retinopathy is present,
subsequent dilated retinal examinations
should be repeated at least annually by
an ophthalmologist or optometrist. If
retinopathy is progressing or sight-
threatening, then examinations will
be required more frequently. B
12.6 Programs that use retinal pho-
tography with remote reading or
the use of U.S. Food and Drug Ad-
ministration–approved artiﬁcial intelli-
gence algorithms to improve access
to diabetic retinopathy screening are
appropriate screening strategies for
diabetic retinopathy. Such programs
need to provide pathways for timely
referral for a comprehensive eye ex-
amination when indicated. B
12.7 Counsel individuals of child-
bearing potential with preexisting
type 1 or type 2 diabetes who are
planning pregnancy or who are preg-
nant on the risk of development
and/or progression of diabetic reti-
nopathy. B
12.8 Individuals with preexisting type 1
or type 2 diabetes should receive an
eye exam before pregnancy and in the
ﬁrst trimester and should be moni-
tored every trimester and for 1 year
postpartum as indicated by the degree
of retinopathy. B
The preventive effects of therapy and
the fact that individuals with any level of
diabetic retinopathy or macular edema
may be asymptomatic provide strong
support for screening to detect diabetic
retinopathy. Prompt diagnosis allows tri-
age of people with diabetes and timely
intervention that may prevent vision loss
in individuals who are asymptomatic de-
spite advanced diabetic eye disease.
Diabetic retinopathy screening should
be performed using validated approaches
and methodologies. Youth with type 1 or
type 2 diabetes are also at risk for com-
plications and need to be screened for
diabetic retinopathy (12) (see Section 14,
“Children and Adolescents”). If diabetic
retinopathy is evident on screening,
prompt referral to an ophthalmologist
is recommended. Subsequent examina-
tions for individuals with type 1 or type 2
diabetes are generally repeated annually
for individuals with minimal to no reti-
nopathy. Exams every 1–2 years may be
cost-effective after one or more normal
eye exams. In a population with well-
controlled type 2 diabetes, there was lit-
tle risk of development of signiﬁcant reti-
nopathy within a 3-year interval after a
normal examination (13), and less fre-
quent intervals have been found in simu-
lated modeling to be potentially effective
in screening for diabetic retinopathy in
individuals without diabetic retinopathy
(14). However, it is important to adjust
screening intervals based on the pres-
ence of speciﬁc risk factors for retinop-
athy onset and worsening retinopathy.
More frequent examinations by the
ophthalmologist will be required if reti-
nopathy is progressing or risk factors
such as uncontrolled hyperglycemia, ad-
vanced baseline retinopathy, or diabetic
macular edema are present.
Retinal photography with remote read-
ing by experts has great potential to pro-
vide screening services in areas where
qualiﬁed eye care professionals are not
readily available (15–17). High-quality
fundus photographs can detect most clin-
ically signiﬁcant diabetic retinopathy. In-
terpretation of the images should be
performed by a trained eye care profes-
sional. Retinal photography may also en-
hance efﬁciency and reduce costs when
the expertise of ophthalmologists can be
used for more complex examinations
and for therapy (15,18,19). In-person ex-
ams are still necessary when the retinal
photos are of unacceptable quality and
for follow-up if abnormalities are detected.
Retinal photos are not a substitute for di-
lated comprehensive eye exams, which
should be performed at least initially and
at yearly intervals thereafter or more fre-
quently as recommended by an eye care
professional. Artiﬁcial intelligence systems
that detect more than mild diabetic reti-
nopathy and diabetic macular edema, au-
thorized for use by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), represent an
alternative to traditional screening ap-
proaches (20). There are now three FDA-
approved artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms
for diabetic retinopathy screening and
examination. These services are now cov-
ered by most insurances. There are pub-
lished prospective multicenter clinical trials
on the diagnostic accuracy for each (21–23).
However, the beneﬁts and optimal utiliza-
tion of this type of screening have yet to be
fully determined. Results of all screening
eye examinations should be documented
and transmitted to the referring health care
professional.
Type 1 Diabetes
Because retinopathy is estimated to take at
least 5 years to develop after the onset of
hyperglycemia, people with type 1 diabetes
should have an initial dilated and compre-
hensive eye examination within 5 years af-
ter the diagnosis of diabetes (14).
Type 2 Diabetes
People with type 2 diabetes who may
have had years of undiagnosed diabetes
and have a signiﬁcant risk of prevalent
diabetic retinopathy at the time of diag-
nosis should have an initial dilated and
comprehensive eye examination at the
time of diagnosis.
Pregnancy
Individuals who develop gestational di-
abetes mellitus do not require eye ex-
aminations during pregnancy since they
do not appear to be at increased risk of
S232
Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

developing diabetic retinopathy during
pregnancy (24). However, individuals of
childbearing potential with preexisting
type 1 or type 2 diabetes who are plan-
ning pregnancy or who have become
pregnant should be counseled on the
baseline prevalence and risk of devel-
opment and/or progression of diabetic
retinopathy. In a systematic review and
meta-analysis of 18 observational stud-
ies of pregnant individuals with preex-
isting type 1 or type 2 diabetes, the
prevalence of any diabetic retinopathy
and proliferative diabetic retinopathy
(PDR) in early pregnancy was 52.3%
and 6.1%, respectively. The pooled pro-
gression rate per 100 pregnancies for
new diabetic retinopathy development
was 15.0 (95% CI 9.9–20.8), worsened
nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy was
31.0 (95% CI 23.2–39.2), pooled sight-
threatening progression rate from non-
proliferative diabetic retinopathy to PDR
was 6.3 (95% CI 3.3–10.0), and worsened
PDR was 37.0 (95% CI 21.2–54.0), demon-
strating that close follow-up should be
maintained during pregnancy to prevent
vision loss (25). In addition, rapid imple-
mentation of intensive glycemic man-
agement in the setting of retinopathy is
associated with early worsening of reti-
nopathy (26).
A systematic review and meta-analysis
and a controlled prospective study dem-
onstrate that pregnancy in individuals
with type 1 diabetes may aggravate reti-
nopathy and threaten vision, especially
when glycemic management is poor or
retinopathy severity is advanced at the
time of conception (25,26). Laser photo-
coagulation surgery can minimize the
risk of vision loss during pregnancy for
individuals with high-risk PDR or center-
involved diabetic macular edema (26).
The use of anti–vascular endothelial
growth factor (anti-VEGF) injections in
pregnant individuals may be justiﬁed
only if the potential beneﬁt outweighs
the potential risk to the fetus and only
if clearly indicated. Current anti-VEGF
medications have been assigned to
pregnancy category C by the FDA (ani-
mal studies have revealed evidence of
embryo–fetal toxicity, but there are no
controlled data in human pregnancy),
and caution should be used in pregnant
individuals with diabetes because of
theoretical risks to the vasculature of
the developing fetus.
Treatment
Recommendations
12.9 Promptly refer individuals with
any level of diabetic macular edema,
moderate or worse nonproliferative di-
abetic retinopathy (a precursor of pro-
liferative diabetic retinopathy [PDR]),
or any PDR to an ophthalmologist
who is knowledgeable and experi-
enced in the management of dia-
betic retinopathy. A
12.10 Panretinal laser photocoagu-
lation therapy is indicated to reduce
the risk of vision loss in individuals
with high-risk PDR and, in some cases,
severe nonproliferative diabetic reti-
nopathy. A
12.11 Intravitreous injections of anti–
vascular endothelial growth factor
(anti-VEGF) are a reasonable alterna-
tive to traditional panretinal laser pho-
tocoagulation for some individuals
with PDR and also reduce the risk of
vision loss in these individuals. A
12.12 Intravitreous injections of anti-
VEGF are indicated as ﬁrst-line treat-
ment for most eyes with diabetic mac-
ular edema that involves the foveal
center and impairs vision acuity. A
12.13 Macular focal/grid photocoagu-
lation and intravitreal injections of cor-
ticosteroid are reasonable treatments
in eyes with persistent diabetic macu-
lar edema despite previous anti-VEGF
therapy or eyes that are not candi-
dates for this ﬁrst-line approach. A
12.14 The presence of retinopathy is
not a contraindication to aspirin ther-
apy for cardioprotection, as aspirin
does not increase the risk of retinal
hemorrhage. A
Two of the main motivations for screen-
ing for diabetic retinopathy are to pre-
vent loss of vision and to intervene with
treatment when vision loss can be pre-
vented or reversed.
Photocoagulation Surgery
Two large trials, the Diabetic Retinopa-
thy Study (DRS) in individuals with PDR
and the Early Treatment Diabetic Reti-
nopathy Study (ETDRS) in individuals
with macular edema, provide the stron-
gest support for the therapeutic bene-
ﬁts of photocoagulation surgery. The
DRS (27) showed that panretinal photo-
coagulation surgery reduced the risk of
severe vision loss from PDR from 15.9%
in untreated eyes to 6.4% in treated
eyes with the greatest beneﬁt ratio in
those with more advanced baseline dis-
ease (disc neovascularization or vitreous
hemorrhage). Later, the ETDRS veriﬁed
the beneﬁts of panretinal photocoagula-
tion for high-risk PDR and in older-onset
individuals with severe nonproliferative
diabetic retinopathy or less-than-high-risk
PDR (28). Panretinal laser photocoagula-
tion is still commonly used to manage
complications of diabetic retinopathy that
involve retinal neovascularization and its
complications. A more gentle, macular fo-
cal/grid laser photocoagulation technique
was shown in the ETDRS to be effective
in treating eyes with clinically signiﬁcant
macular edema from diabetes (28), but
this is now largely considered to be sec-
ond-line treatment for diabetic macular
edema.
Anti–Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor
Treatment
Data from the DRCR Retina Network
(formerly the Diabetic Retinopathy Clini-
cal Research Network) and others dem-
onstrate that intravitreal injections of
anti-VEGF agents are effective at re-
gressing proliferative disease and lead
to noninferior or superior visual acuity
outcomes compared with panretinal la-
ser over 2 years of follow-up (29,30). In
addition, it was observed that individu-
als treated with ranibizumab tended to
have less peripheral visual ﬁeld loss, fewer
vitrectomy surgeries for secondary compli-
cations from their proliferative disease,
and a lower risk of developing diabetic
macular edema (29). However, a poten-
tial drawback in using anti-VEGF therapy
to manage proliferative disease is that in-
dividuals were required to have a greater
number of visits and received a greater
number of treatments than is typically
required for management with panretinal
laser, which may not be optimal for
some individuals. The FDA has approved
aﬂibercept and ranibizumab for the treat-
ment of eyes with diabetic retinopathy.
Other emerging therapies for retinopathy
that may use sustained intravitreal deliv-
ery of pharmacologic agents are currently
under investigation. Anti-VEGF treatment
of eyes with nonproliferative diabetic ret-
inopathy has been demonstrated to re-
duce subsequent development of retinal
neovascularization and diabetic macular
edema but has not been shown to improve
diabetesjournals.org/care
Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care
S233
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

visual outcomes over 2 years of therapy
and therefore is not routinely recom-
mended for this indication (31).
While the ETDRS (28) established the
beneﬁt of focal laser photocoagulation
surgery in eyes with clinically signiﬁcant
macular edema (deﬁned as retinal edema
located at or threatening the macular cen-
ter), current data from well-designed clini-
cal trials demonstrate that intravitreal
anti-VEGF agents provide a more effective
treatment plan for center-involved dia-
betic macular edema than monotherapy
with laser (32,33). Most individuals re-
quire near-monthly administration of in-
travitreal therapy with anti-VEGF agents
during the ﬁrst 12 months of treatment,
with fewer injections needed in subse-
quent years to maintain remission from
central-involved diabetic macular edema.
There are currently ﬁve anti-VEGF agents
used to treat eyes with central-involved
diabetic macular edema—bevacizumab,
ranibizumab, aﬂibercept, brolucizumab and
faricimab (1)—and a comparative effective-
ness study demonstrated that aﬂibercept
provides vision outcomes superior to those
of bevacizumab when eyes have moderate
visual impairment (vision of 20/50 or
worse) from diabetic macular edema
(34). For eyes that have good vision (20/25
or better) despite diabetic macular edema,
close monitoring with initiation of anti-
VEGF therapy if vision worsens provides
similar 2-year vision outcomes compared
with immediate initiation of anti-VEGF
therapy (35).
Eyes that have persistent diabetic
macular edema despite anti-VEGF treat-
ment may beneﬁt from macular laser
photocoagulation or intravitreal therapy
with corticosteroids. Both of these ther-
apies are also reasonable ﬁrst-line ap-
proaches for individuals who are not
candidates for anti-VEGF treatment
due to systemic considerations such as
pregnancy.
Adjunctive Therapy
Lowering blood pressure has been shown
to
decrease
retinopathy
progression,
although strict goals (systolic blood pres-
sure <120 mmHg) do not impart addi-
tional beneﬁt (8). In individuals with
dyslipidemia, retinopathy progression
may be slowed by the addition of feno-
ﬁbrate, particularly with very mild non-
proliferative diabetic retinopathy at
baseline (36,37).
Visual Rehabilitation
Recommendations
12.15 People who experience vision
loss from diabetes should be coun-
seled on the availability and scope of
vision rehabilitation care and provided,
or referred for, a comprehensive evalu-
ation of their visual impairment by a
practitioner experienced in vision reha-
bilitation. E
12.16 People with vision loss from dia-
betes should receive educational mate-
rials and resources for eye care support
in addition to self-management educa-
tion (e.g., glycemic management and
hypoglycemia awareness). E
In the U.S., 12% of adults with diabe-
tes have some level of vision impair-
ment (38). They may have difﬁculty
controlling their diabetes and perform-
ing many other activities of daily living,
which can lead to depression, anxiety,
social isolation, and difﬁculties at home,
workplace, school, or workplace (39).
People with diabetes are at increased
risk of chronic vision loss, subsequent
functional decline, and resulting dis-
ability. Vision impairment has physical,
psychological, behavioral, and social con-
sequences that affect people with diabe-
tes, their families, friends, and caregivers.
Health care professionals and stakehold-
ers may not be aware of the overall im-
pact of vision loss on an individual’s
health and well-being. People with diabe-
tes-related vision loss should be evaluated
to determine their potential to beneﬁt
from comprehensive vision restoration.
Vision rehabilitation can help people with
vision loss achieve maximum function, in-
dependence, and quality of life.
NEUROPATHY
Screening
Recommendations
12.17 All people with diabetes should
be assessed for diabetic peripheral
neuropathy starting at diagnosis of
type 2 diabetes and 5 years after the
diagnosis of type 1 diabetes and at
least annually thereafter. B
12.18 Assessment for distal symmet-
ric polyneuropathy should include a
careful history and assessment of
either temperature or pinprick sensa-
tion (small-ﬁber function) and vibra-
tion sensation using a 128-Hz tuning
fork (for large-ﬁber function). All people
with diabetes should have annual 10-g
monoﬁlament testing to identify feet at
risk for ulceration and amputation. B
12.19 Symptoms and signs of auto-
nomic neuropathy should be assessed
in people with diabetes starting at di-
agnosis of type 2 diabetes and 5 years
after the diagnosis of type 1 diabetes,
and at least annually thereafter, and
with evidence of other microvascular
complications, particularly kidney dis-
ease and diabetic peripheral neuropa-
thy. Screening can include asking about
orthostatic dizziness, syncope, or dry
cracked skin in the extremities. Signs of
autonomic neuropathy include ortho-
static hypotension, a resting tachycar-
dia, or evidence of peripheral dryness
or cracking of skin. E
Diabetic neuropathies are a heteroge-
neous group of disorders with diverse
clinical manifestations. The early recog-
nition and appropriate management of
neuropathy in people with diabetes is
important. Points to be aware of in-
clude the following:
1. Diabetic neuropathy is a diagnosis
of exclusion. Nondiabetic neuropa-
thies may be present in people with
diabetes and may be treatable.
2. Up to 50% of diabetic peripheral
neuropathy may be asymptomatic.
If not recognized and if preventive
foot care is not implemented, peo-
ple with diabetes are at risk for in-
juries as well as diabetic foot ulcers
(DFUs) and amputations.
3. Recognition and treatment of auto-
nomic neuropathy may improve symp-
toms, reduce sequelae, and improve
quality of life.
Speciﬁc treatment to reverse the un-
derlying nerve damage is currently not
available. Glycemic management can
effectively prevent diabetic peripheral
neuropathy (DPN) and cardiovascular
autonomic neuropathy (CAN) in type 1
diabetes (40,41) and may modestly slow
their progression in type 2 diabetes
(42), but it does not reverse neuronal
loss. Treatments of other modiﬁable risk
factors (including lipids and blood pres-
sure) can aid in prevention of DPN pro-
gression in type 2 diabetes and may
reduce disease progression in type 1 di-
abetes (43–45). Therapeutic strategies
S234
Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

(pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic)
for the relief of painful DPN and symp-
toms of autonomic neuropathy can po-
tentially reduce pain (46) and improve
quality of life.
Diagnosis
Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy
Individuals with a type 1 diabetes dura-
tion $5 years and all individuals with
type 2 diabetes should be assessed an-
nually for DPN using the medical history
and simple clinical tests (46). Symptoms
vary according to the class of sensory ﬁ-
bers involved. The most common early
symptoms are induced by the involve-
ment of small ﬁbers and include pain and
dysesthesia (unpleasant sensations of
burning and tingling). The involvement of
large ﬁbers may cause numbness and loss
of protective sensation (LOPS). LOPS indi-
cates the presence of distal sensory poly-
neuropathy and is a risk factor for diabetic
foot ulceration. The following clinical tests
may be used to assess small- and large-
ﬁber function and protective sensation:
1. Small-ﬁber function: pinprick and
temperature sensation.
2. Large-ﬁber function: lower-extremity
reﬂexes, vibration perception, and 10-g
monoﬁlament.
3. Protective sensation: 10-g monoﬁlament.
These tests not only screen for the
presence of dysfunction but also predict
future risk of complications. Electrophys-
iological testing or referral to a neurolo-
gist is rarely needed, except in situations
where the clinical features are atypical
or the diagnosis is unclear.
In all people with diabetes and DPN,
causes of neuropathy other than diabetes
should be considered, including toxins (e.g.,
alcohol), neurotoxic medications (e.g., che-
motherapy), vitamin B12 deﬁciency, hypo-
thyroidism, renal disease, malignancies
(e.g., multiple myeloma, bronchogenic
carcinoma), infections (e.g., HIV), chronic
inﬂammatory demyelinating neuropathy,
inherited neuropathies, and vasculitis (47).
See the American Diabetes Association po-
sition statement “Diabetic Neuropathy”
for more details (46).
Diabetic Autonomic Neuropathy
Individuals who have had type 1 diabe-
tes for $5 years and all individuals with
type 2 diabetes should be assessed
annually for autonomic neuropathy (46).
The symptoms and signs of autonomic
neuropathy should be elicited carefully
during the history and physical examina-
tion. Major clinical manifestations of
diabetic autonomic neuropathy include
resting tachycardia, orthostatic hypoten-
sion, gastroparesis, constipation, diarrhea,
fecal incontinence, erectile dysfunction,
neurogenic bladder, and sudomotor
dysfunction with either increased or
decreased sweating. Screening for symp-
toms of autonomic neuropathy includes
asking about symptoms of orthostatic in-
tolerance (dizziness, lightheadedness, or
weakness with standing), syncope, exer-
cise intolerance, constipation, diarrhea,
urinary retention, urinary incontinence,
or changes in sweat function. Further
testing can be considered if symptoms
are present and will depend on the end
organ involved but might include cardio-
vascular autonomic testing, sweat testing,
urodynamic studies, gastric emptying, or
endoscopy/colonoscopy. Impaired coun-
terregulatory responses to hypoglyce-
mia in type 1 and type 2 diabetes can
lead to hypoglycemia unawareness but
are not directly linked to autonomic
neuropathy.
Cardiovascular Autonomic Neuropathy. Car-
diovascular autonomic neuropathy (CAN)
is associated with mortality indepen-
dently of other cardiovascular risk factors
(48,49). In its early stages, CAN may be
completely asymptomatic and detected
only by decreased heart rate variability
with deep breathing. Advanced disease
may be associated with resting tachycar-
dia (>100 bpm) and orthostatic hypoten-
sion (a fall in systolic or diastolic blood
pressure by >20 mmHg or >10 mmHg,
respectively, upon standing without an
appropriate increase in heart rate). CAN
treatment is generally focused on allevi-
ating symptoms.
Gastrointestinal Neuropathies. Gastrointes-
tinal neuropathies may involve any por-
tion of the gastrointestinal tract, with
manifestations including esophageal dys-
motility, gastroparesis, constipation, diar-
rhea, and fecal incontinence. Gastroparesis
should be suspected in individuals with
erratic glycemic management or with up-
per gastrointestinal symptoms without
another identiﬁed cause. Exclusion of
reversible/iatrogenic
causes
such
as
medications or organic causes of gastric
outlet obstruction or peptic ulcer disease
(with esophagogastroduodenoscopy or a
barium study of the stomach) is needed
before considering a diagnosis of or spe-
cialized testing for gastroparesis. The di-
agnostic gold standard for gastroparesis
is the measurement of gastric emptying
with scintigraphy of digestible solids at
15-min intervals for 4 h after food intake.
The use of 13C octanoic acid breath test is
an approved alternative.
Genitourinary Disturbances. Diabetic au-
tonomic neuropathy may also cause gen-
itourinary disturbances, including sexual
dysfunction and bladder dysfunction.
In men, diabetic autonomic neuropathy
may cause erectile dysfunction and/or
retrograde ejaculation (46). Female sex-
ual dysfunction occurs more frequently
in those with diabetes and presents as
decreased sexual desire, increased pain
during intercourse, decreased sexual
arousal, and inadequate lubrication (50).
Lower urinary tract symptoms manifest as
urinary incontinence and bladder dysfunc-
tion (nocturia, frequent urination, urina-
tion urgency, and weak urinary stream).
Evaluation of bladder function should be
performed for individuals with diabetes
who have recurrent urinary tract infec-
tions, pyelonephritis, incontinence, or a
palpable bladder.
Treatment
Recommendations
12.20 Optimize glucose management
to prevent or delay the development
of neuropathy in people with type 1
diabetes A and to slow the progression
of neuropathy in people with type 2
diabetes. C Optimize blood pressure
and serum lipid control to reduce the
risk or slow the progression of diabetic
neuropathy. B
12.21 Assess and treat pain related
to diabetic peripheral neuropathy B
and symptoms of autonomic neurop-
athy to improve quality of life. E
12.22
Gabapentinoids, serotonin-
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors,
tricyclic antidepressants, and sodium
channel blockers are recommended as
initial pharmacologic treatments for
neuropathic pain in diabetes. A Refer
to neurologist or pain specialist when
adequate pain management is not
achieved within the scope of practice
of the treating clinician. E
diabetesjournals.org/care
Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care
S235
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Glycemic Management
Near-normal glycemic management,
implemented early in the course of dia-
betes, has been shown to effectively de-
lay or prevent the development of DPN
and CAN in people with type 1 diabetes
(51–54). Although the evidence for the
beneﬁt of near-normal glycemic manage-
ment is not as strong that for type 2 dia-
betes, some studies have demonstrated a
modest slowing of progression without re-
versal of neuronal loss (42,55). Speciﬁc
glucose-lowering strategies may have dif-
ferent effects. In a post hoc analysis, par-
ticipants, particularly men, in the Bypass
Angioplasty Revascularization Investiga-
tion in Type 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D) trial
treated with insulin sensitizers had a
lower incidence of distal symmetric poly-
neuropathy over 4 years than those
treated with insulin/sulfonylurea (56).
Additionally, recent evidence from the
Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in
Diabetes (ACCORD) trial showed clear
beneﬁt of intensive glucose and blood
pressure management on the preven-
tion of CAN in type 2 diabetes (57).
Lipid Management
Dyslipidemia is a key factor in the devel-
opment of neuropathy in people with
type 2 diabetes and may contribute to
neuropathy risk in people with type 1 di-
abetes (58,59). Although the evidence for
a relationship between lipids and neurop-
athy development has become increas-
ingly clear in type 2 diabetes, the optimal
therapeutic intervention has not been
identiﬁed. Positive effects of physical ac-
tivity, weight loss, and bariatric surgery
have been reported in individuals with
DPN, but use of conventional lipid-lowering
pharmacotherapy (such as statins or fenoﬁ-
brates) does not appear to be effective in
treating or preventing DPN development
(60).
Blood Pressure Management
There are multiple reasons for blood
pressure management in people with di-
abetes, but neuropathy progression (es-
pecially in type 2 diabetes) has now
been added to this list. Although data
from many studies have supported the
role of hypertension in risk of neuropathy
development, a recent meta-analysis of
data from 14 countries in the Interna-
tional Prevalence and Treatment of Diabe-
tes and Depression (INTERPRET-DD) study
revealed hypertension as an independent
risk of DPN development with an odds
ratio of 1.58 (61). In the ACCORD trial, in-
tensive blood pressure intervention de-
creased CAN risk by 25% (57).
Neuropathic Pain
Neuropathic pain can be severe and can
impact quality of life, limit mobility, and
contribute to depression and social dys-
function (62). No compelling evidence
exists in support of glycemic or lifestyle
management as therapies for neuro-
pathic pain in diabetes or prediabetes,
which leaves only pharmaceutical inter-
ventions (63). A recent guideline by the
American Academy of Neurology rec-
ommends that the initial treatment of
pain should also focus on the concur-
rent treatment of both sleep and mood
disorders because of increased frequency
of these problems in individuals with
DPN (64).
A number of pharmacologic therapies
exist for treatment of pain in diabetes.
The American Academy of Neurology
update suggested that gabapentinoids,
serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake in-
hibitors (SNRIs), sodium channel block-
ers, and tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
could all be considered in the treatment
of pain in DPN (64). These American
Academy of Neurology recommendations
offer a supplement to a recent American
Diabetes Association pain monograph
(65). A recent head-to-head trial sug-
gested therapeutic equivalency for TCAs,
SNRIs, and gabapentinoids in the treat-
ment of pain in DPN (66). The trial also
supported the role of combination ther-
apy over monotherapy for the treatment
of pain in DPN.
Gabapentinoids. Gabapentinoids include
several calcium channel a2-d subunit
ligands. Eight high-quality studies and
seven medium-quality studies support
the role of pregabalin in treatment of
pain in DPN. One high-quality study and
many small studies support the role of
gabapentin in the treatment of pain in
DPN. Two medium-quality studies sug-
gest that mirogabalin has a small effect
on pain in DPN (64). Adverse effects
may be more severe in older individu-
als (67) and may be attenuated by
lower starting doses and more gradual
titration.
SNRIs. SNRIs include duloxetine, venla-
faxine, and desvenlafaxine, all selective
SNRIs. Two high-quality studies and ﬁve
medium-quality studies support the role
of duloxetine in the treatment of pain
in DPN. A high-quality study supports
the role of venlafaxine in the treatment
of pain in DPN. Only one medium-quality
study supports a possible role for des-
venlafaxine for treatment of pain in DPN
(64). Adverse events may be more severe
in older people but may be attenuated
with lower doses and slower titration of
duloxetine.
Tapentadol
and
Tramadol. Tapentadol
and tramadol are centrally acting opioid
analgesics that exert their analgesic ef-
fects through both m-opioid receptor
agonism and norepinephrine and sero-
tonin reuptake inhibition. SNRI/opioid
agents are probably effective in the
treatment of pain in DPN. However,
the use of any opioids for manage-
ment of chronic neuropathic pain car-
ries the risk of addiction and should
be avoided.
Tricyclic Antidepressants. TCAs have been
studied for treatment of pain, and most
of the relevant data were acquired from
trials of amitriptyline and include two
high-quality studies and two medium-
quality studies supporting the treatment
of pain in DPN (64,66). Anticholinergic
side effects may be dose limiting and
restrict use in individuals $65 years of
age.
Sodium Channel Blockers. Sodium chan-
nel blockers include lamotrigine, lacosa-
mide, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine,
and valproic acid. Five medium-quality
studies support the role of sodium
channel blockers in treating pain in
DPN (64).
Capsaicin. Capsaicin has received FDA
approval for treatment of pain in DPN
using an 8% patch, with one high-quality
study reported. One medium-quality study
of 0.075% capsaicin cream has been re-
ported. In individulas with contraindica-
tions to oral pharmacotherapy or who
prefer topical treatments, the use of topi-
cal capsaicin can be considered.
Lidocaine
5%
Plaster/Patch. Lidocaine
patches have limited data supporting
their use in DPN and are not effective
in more widespread distribution of pain
(although they may be of use in individ-
uals with nocturnal neuropathic foot
pain). Lidocaine patches cannot be used
for more than 12 h in a 24-h period
(68).
S236
Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

a-Lipoic Acid. a-Lipoic acid, although not
approved for the treatment of painful
DPN, may be effective and considered
for the treatment of painful DPN (64,
65).
Orthostatic Hypotension
Treating orthostatic hypotension is chal-
lenging. The therapeutic goal is to mini-
mize postural symptoms rather than to
restore normotension. Most individuals
require both nonpharmacologic meas-
ures (e.g., ensuring adequate salt intake,
avoiding medications that aggravate hy-
potension, or using compressive gar-
ments over the legs and abdomen) and
pharmacologic measures. Physical activ-
ity and exercise should be encouraged
to avoid deconditioning, which is known
to exacerbate orthostatic intolerance,
and volume repletion with ﬂuids and
salt is critical. There have been clinical
studies that assessed the impact of an
approach incorporating the aforemen-
tioned nonpharmacologic measures. Ad-
ditionally, supine blood pressure tends
to be much higher in these individuals,
often requiring treatment of blood pres-
sure at bedtime with shorter-acting drugs
that also affect baroreceptor activity such
as guanfacine or clonidine, shorter-acting
calcium blockers (e.g., isradipine), or
shorter-acting b-blockers such as ateno-
lol or metoprolol tartrate. Alternatives
can include enalapril if an individual is
unable to tolerate preferred agents
(69–71). Midodrine and droxidopa are
approved by the FDA for the treat-
ment of orthostatic hypotension.
Gastroparesis
Treatment for diabetic gastroparesis may
be very challenging. A low-ﬁber, low-fat
eating plan provided in small frequent
meals with a greater proportion of liquid
calories may be useful (72–74). In addi-
tion, foods with small particle size may
improve key symptoms (75). Withdraw-
ing drugs with adverse effects on gastro-
intestinal
motility,
including
opioids,
anticholinergics, TCAs, GLP-1 RAs, and
pramlintide, may also improve intestinal
motility (72,76). However, the risk of re-
moval of GLP-1 RAs should be balanced
against their potential beneﬁts. In cases
of severe gastroparesis, pharmacologic
interventions are needed. Only metoclo-
pramide, a prokinetic agent, is approved
by the FDA for the treatment of gastro-
paresis. However, the level of evidence
regarding the beneﬁts of metoclopra-
mide for the management of gastropare-
sis is weak, and given the risk for serious
adverse effects (extrapyramidal signs such
as acute dystonic reactions, drug-induced
parkinsonism, akathisia, and tardive dyski-
nesia), its use in the treatment of gastro-
paresis beyond 12 weeks is no longer
recommended by the FDA. It should be
reserved for severe cases that are unre-
sponsive to other therapies (76). Other
treatment options include domperidone
(available outside the U.S.) and erythro-
mycin, which is only effective for short-
term use due to tachyphylaxis (77,78).
Gastric electrical stimulation using a surgi-
cally implantable device has received ap-
proval from the FDA, although there are
very limited data in DPN and the results
do not support gastric stimulation as an
effective therapy in diabetic gastroparesis
(79).
Erectile Dysfunction
In addition to treatment of hypogonad-
ism if present, treatments for erectile
dysfunction may include phosphodies-
terase type 5 inhibitors, intracorporeal
or intraurethral prostaglandins, vacuum
devices, or penile prostheses. As with
DPN treatments, these interventions do
not change the underlying pathology
and natural history of the disease pro-
cess but may improve a person’s quality
of life.
FOOT CARE
Recommendations
12.23 Perform a comprehensive foot
evaluation at least annually to iden-
tify risk factors for ulcers and ampu-
tations. A
12.24 The examination should include in-
spection of the skin, assessment of foot
deformities, neurological assessment
(10-g monoﬁlament testing with at
least one other assessment: pinprick,
temperature, or vibration), and vas-
cular assessment, including pulses in
the legs and feet. B
12.25 Individuals with evidence of
sensory loss or prior ulceration or
amputation should have their feet
inspected at every visit. A
12.26 Obtain a prior history of ulcera-
tion, amputation, Charcot foot, angio-
plasty or vascular surgery, cigarette
smoking, retinopathy, and renal dis-
ease and assess current symptoms of
neuropathy (pain, burning, numbness)
and vascular disease (leg fatigue, clau-
dication). B
12.27 Initial screening for peripheral
arterial disease (PAD) should in-
clude assessment of lower-extremity
pulses, capillary reﬁll time, rubor on
dependency, pallor on elevation, and
venous ﬁlling time. Individuals with
a history of leg fatigue, claudication,
and rest pain relieved with depen-
dency or decreased or absent pedal
pulses should be referred for ankle-
brachial index with toe pressures and
for further vascular assessment as
appropriate. B
12.28 An interprofessional approach
facilitated by a podiatrist in conjunction
with other appropriate team members
is recommended for individuals with
foot ulcers and high-risk feet (e.g.,
those on dialysis, those with Charcot
foot, those with a history of prior ulcers
or amputation, and those with PAD). B
12.29 Refer individuals who smoke
and have a history of prior lower-
extremity complications, loss of pro-
tective sensation, structural abnormal-
ities, or PAD to foot care specialists for
ongoing preventive care and lifelong
surveillance. B
12.30 Provide general preventive foot
self-care education to all people with
diabetes, including those with loss of
protective sensation, on appropriate
ways to examine their feet (palpation
or visual inspection with an unbreak-
able mirror) for daily surveillance of
early foot problems. B
12.31 The use of specialized thera-
peutic footwear is recommended for
people with diabetes at high risk for
ulceration, including those with loss
of protective sensation, foot deformi-
ties, ulcers, callous formation, poor
peripheral circulation, or history of
amputation. B
12.32 For chronic diabetic foot ulcers
that have failed to heal with optimal
standard care alone, adjunctive treat-
ment with randomized controlled trial–
proven advanced agents should be
considered. Considerations might in-
clude negative-pressure wound therapy,
placental membranes, bioengineered
skin substitutes, several acellular ma-
trices, autologous ﬁbrin and leukocyte
platelet patches, and topical oxygen
therapy. A
diabetesjournals.org/care
Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care
S237
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Foot ulcerations and amputations are com-
mon complications associated with diabe-
tes. These may be the consequences of
several factors, including peripheral neu-
ropathy, peripheral arterial disease (PAD),
and foot deformities.They represent major
causes of morbidity and mortality in peo-
ple with diabetes. Early recognition of at-
risk feet, preulcerative lesions, and prompt
treatment of ulcerations and other lower-
extremity complications can delay or pre-
vent adverse outcomes.
Early recognition requires an under-
standing of those factors that put peo-
ple with diabetes at increased risk for
ulcerations and amputations. Factors
that are associated with the at-risk foot
include the following:
• Poor glycemic management
• Peripheral neuropathy/LOPS
• PAD
• Foot deformities (bunions, hammer-
toes, Charcot joint, etc.)
• Preulcerative corns or calluses
• Prior ulceration
• Prior amputation
• Smoking
• Retinopathy
• Nephropathy (particularly individuals
on dialysis or posttransplant)
Identifying the at-risk foot begins
with a detailed history documenting di-
abetes management, smoking history,
exercise tolerance, history of claudica-
tion or rest pain, and prior ulcerations
or amputations. A thorough examina-
tion of the feet should be performed
annually in all people with diabetes and
more frequently in at-risk individuals
(80). The examination should include
assessment of skin integrity, assessment
for LOPS using the 10-g monoﬁlament
along with at least one other neurologi-
cal assessment tool, pulse examination
of the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial
arteries, and assessment for foot deformi-
ties such as bunions, hammertoes, and
prominent metatarsals, which increase
plantar foot pressures and increase risk
for ulcerations. At-risk individuals should
be assessed at each visit and should be
referred to foot care specialists for ongo-
ing preventive care and surveillance. The
physical examination can stratify people
with diabetes into different categories
and determine the frequency of these vis-
its (81) (Table 12.1).
Evaluation for Loss of Protective
Sensation
The presence of peripheral sensory neu-
ropathy is the single most common
component cause for foot ulceration. In
a multicenter trial, peripheral neuropa-
thy was found to be a component cause
in 78% of people with diabetes with ul-
cerations and that the triad of periph-
eral sensory neuropathy, minor trauma,
and foot deformity was present in
>63% of participants (82). All people
with diabetes should undergo a com-
prehensive foot examination at least an-
nually, or more frequently for those in
higher-risk categories (80,81).
LOPS is vital to risk assessment. One
of the most useful tests to determine
LOPS is the 10-g monoﬁlament test.
Studies have shown that clinical exami-
nation and the 10-g monoﬁlament test
are the two most sensitive tests in iden-
tifying the foot at risk for ulceration
(83). The monoﬁlament test should be
performed with at least one other neu-
rologic assessment tool (e.g., pinprick,
temperature perception, ankle reﬂexes,
or vibratory perception with a 128-Hz
tuning fork or similar device). Absent
monoﬁlament sensation and one other
abnormal test conﬁrms the presence of
LOPS. Further neurological testing, such
as nerve conduction, electromyography,
nerve biopsy, or intraepidermal nerve
ﬁber density biopsies, are rarely indi-
cated for the diagnosis of peripheral
sensory neuropathy (46).
Evaluation for Peripheral Arterial
Disease
Initial screening for PAD should include
a history of leg fatigue, claudication,
and rest pain relieved with dependency.
Physical examination for PAD should in-
clude assessment of lower-extremity
pulses, capillary reﬁll time, rubor on de-
pendency, pallor on elevation, and ve-
nous ﬁlling time (80,84). Any individual
exhibiting signs and symptoms of PAD
should be referred for noninvasive arterial
studies in the form of Doppler ultrasound
with
pulse
volume
recordings. While
ankle-brachial indices will be calculated,
they should be interpreted carefully, as
they are known to be inaccurate in peo-
ple with diabetes due to noncompressible
vessels. Toe systolic blood pressure tends
to be more accurate. Toe systolic blood
pressures <30 mmHg are suggestive of
PAD and an inability to heal foot ulcera-
tions (85). Individuals with abnormal pulse
volume recording tracings and toe pres-
sures <30 mmHg with foot ulcers should
be referred for immediate vascular eval-
uation. Due to the high prevalence of
PAD in people with diabetes, the Society
Table 12.1—International Working Group on the Diabetic Foot risk stratiﬁcation system and corresponding foot screening
frequency
Category
Ulcer risk
Characteristics
Examination frequency*
0
Very low
No LOPS and No PAD
Annually
1
Low
LOPS or PAD
Every 6–12 months
2
Moderate
LOPS 1 PAD, or
LOPS 1 foot deformity, or
PAD 1 foot deformity
Every 3–6 months
3
High
LOPS or PAD and one or more of the following:
 History of foot ulcer
 Amputation (minor or major)
 End-stage renal disease
Every 1–3 months
Adapted with permission from Schaper et al. (81). LOPS, loss of protective sensation; PAD, peripheral artery disease. *Examination frequency
suggestions are based on expert opinion and person-centered requirements.
S238
Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

for Vascular Surgery and the American
Podiatric Medical Association guidelines
recommend that all people with diabe-
tes >50 years of age should undergo
screening via noninvasive arterial studies
(84,86). If normal, these should be re-
peated every 5 years (84).
Education for People With Diabetes
All people with diabetes (and their fami-
lies), particularly those with the afore-
mentioned high-risk conditions, should
receive general foot care education, in-
cluding appropriate management strate-
gies (87–89). This education should be
provided to all newly diagnosed people
with diabetes as part of an annual com-
prehensive examination and to individu-
als with high-risk conditions at every
visit. Recent studies have shown that
while education improves knowledge of
diabetic foot problems and self-care of
the foot, it does not improve behaviors
associated with active participation in
their overall diabetes care and to achieve
personal health goals (90). Evidence also
suggests that while education for people
with diabetes and their families is impor-
tant, the knowledge is quickly forgotten
and needs to be reinforced regularly (91).
Individuals considered at risk should
understand the implications of foot de-
formities, LOPS, and PAD; the proper
care of the foot, including nail and skin
care; and the importance of foot inspec-
tions on a daily basis. Individuals with
LOPS should be educated on appropriate
ways to examine their feet (palpation or
visual inspection with an unbreakable
mirror) for daily surveillance of early foot
problems. People with diabetes should
also be educated on the importance of
referrals to foot care specialists. A recent
study showed that people with diabetes
and foot disease lacked awareness of
their risk status and why they were be-
ing referred to a interprofessional team
of foot care specialists. Further, they ex-
hibited a variable degree of interest in
learning further about foot complications
(92).
Individuals’ understanding of these
issues and their physical ability to con-
duct proper foot surveillance and care
should be assessed. Those with visual
difﬁculties, physical constraints preventing
movement, or cognitive problems that
impair their ability to assess the condition
of the foot and to institute appropriate
responses will need other people, such as
family members, to assist with their care.
The selection of appropriate footwear
and footwear behaviors at home should
also be discussed (e.g., no walking bare-
foot, avoiding open-toed shoes). Therapeu-
tic footwear with custom-made orthotic
devices have been shown to reduce peak
plantar pressures (89). Most studies use
reduction in peak plantar pressures as an
outcome as opposed to ulcer prevention.
Certain design features of the orthoses,
such as rocker soles and metatarsal ac-
commodations, can reduce peak plantar
pressures more signiﬁcantly than insoles
alone. A systematic review, however,
showed there was no signiﬁcant reduc-
tion in ulcer incidence after 18 months
compared with standard insoles and extra-
depth shoes. Further, it was also noted
that evidence to prevent ﬁrst ulcerations
was nonexistent (93).
Treatment
Treatment recommendations for people
with diabetes will be determined by
their risk category. No-risk or low-risk in-
dividuals can often be managed with
education and self-care. People in the
moderate to high risk category should
be referred to foot care specialists for
further evaluation and regular surveil-
lance as outlined in Table 12.1. This
includes individuals with LOPS, PAD,
and/or structural foot deformities, such
as Charcot foot, bunions, or hammer-
toes. Individuals with any open ulcera-
tion or unexplained swelling, erythema,
or increased skin temperature should
be referred urgently to a foot care spe-
cialist or interprofessional team.
Initial treatment recommendations should
include daily foot inspection, use of mois-
turizers for dry, scaly skin, and avoidance
of self-care of ingrown nails and calluses.
Well-ﬁtted athletic or walking shoes with
customized
pressure-relieving
orthoses
should be part of initial recommenda-
tions for people with increased plantar
pressures (as demonstrated by plantar
calluses). Individuals with deformities such
as bunions or hammertoes may require
specialized footwear such as extra-depth
shoes. Those with even more signiﬁcant
deformities, as in Charcot joint disease,
may require custom-made footwear.
Special consideration should be given
to individuals with neuropathy who pre-
sent with a warm, swollen, red foot
with or without a history of trauma and
without an open ulceration. These indi-
viduals require a thorough workup for
possible Charcot neuroarthropathy (94).
Early diagnosis and treatment of this
condition is of paramount importance
in preventing deformities and instability
that can lead to ulceration and amputa-
tion. These individuals require total non–
weight-bearing and urgent referral to a
foot care specialist for further manage-
ment. Foot and ankle X-rays should be
performed in all individuals presenting
with the above clinical ﬁndings.
There have been a number of develop-
ments in the treatment of ulcerations over
the years (95). These include negative-
pressure therapy, growth factors, bioengi-
neered tissue, acellular matrix tissue, stem
cell therapy, hyperbaric oxygen therapy,
and, most recently, topical oxygen therapy
(96–98). While there is literature to sup-
port many modalities currently used to
treat diabetic foot wounds, robust ran-
domized controlled trials (RCTs) are often
lacking. However, it is agreed that the ini-
tial treatment and evaluation of ulcera-
tions include the following ﬁve basic
principles of ulcer treatment:
• Ofﬂoading of plantar ulcerations
• Debridement of necrotic, nonviable
tissue
• Revascularization of ischemic wounds
when necessary
• Management of infection: soft tissue
or bone
• Use of physiologic, topical dressings
However, despite following the above
principles, some ulcerations will become
chronic and fail to heal. In those situa-
tions, advanced wound therapy can play
a role. When to use advanced wound
therapy has been the subject of much
discussion, as the therapy is often quite
expensive. It has been determined that
if a wound fails to show a reduction of
50% or more after 4 weeks of appropri-
ate wound management (i.e., the ﬁve
basic principles above), consideration
should be given to the use of advanced
wound therapy (99). Treatment of these
chronic wounds is best managed in an
interprofessional setting.
Evidence to support advanced wound
therapy is challenging to produce and to
assess. Randomization of trial participants
is difﬁcult, as there are many variables
diabetesjournals.org/care
Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care
S239
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

that can affect wound healing. In addi-
tion, many RCTs exclude certain cohorts
of people, e.g., individuals with chronic
renal disease or those on dialysis. Finally,
blinding of participants and clinicians is
not always possible. Meta-analyses and
systematic reviews of observational stud-
ies are used to determine the clinical
effectiveness of these modalities. Such
studies can augment formal RCTs by in-
cluding a greater variety of participants in
various clinical settings who are typically
excluded from the more rigidly structured
clinical trials.
Advanced wound therapy can be cate-
gorized
into
nine
broad
categories
(95) (Table 12.2). Topical growth factors,
acellular matrix tissues, and bioengi-
neered cellular therapies are commonly
used in ofﬁces and wound care centers
to expedite healing of chronic, more su-
perﬁcial ulcerations. Numerous clinical
reports and retrospective studies have
demonstrated the clinical effectiveness
of each of these modalities. Over the years,
there has been increased evidence to sup-
port the use of these modalities. Nonethe-
less, use of those products or agents with
robust RCTs or systematic reviews should
generally be preferred over those without
level 1 evidence (Table 12.2).
Negative-pressure wound therapy was
ﬁrst introduced in the early to mid-
1990s. It has become especially useful in
wound preparation for skin grafts and
ﬂaps and assists in the closure of deep,
large wounds (100,101). A variety of
types exist in the marketplace and
range from electrically powered to
mechanically powered in different
sizes depending upon the speciﬁc
wound requirements.
Electrical stimulation, pulsed radiofre-
quency energy, and extracorporeal shock-
wave therapy are biophysical modalities
that are believed to upregulate growth
factors or cytokines to stimulate wound
healing, while low-frequency noncontact
ultrasound is used to debride wounds.
However, most of the studies advocating
the use of these modalities have been ret-
rospective observational or poor-quality
RCTs.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy is the de-
livery of oxygen through a chamber, ei-
ther individual or multiperson, with the
intention of increasing tissue oxygena-
tion to increase tissue perfusion and
neovascularization, combat resistant bac-
teria,
and
stimulate
wound
healing.
While there had been great interest in
this modality being able to expedite
healing of chronic DFUs, there has only
been one positive RCT published in the
last decade that reported increased heal-
ing rates at 9 and 12 months compared
with control subjects (102). More recent
studies with signiﬁcant design deﬁcien-
cies and participant dropouts have failed
to provide corroborating evidence that
hyperbaric oxygen therapy should be
widely used for managing nonhealing
DFUs (103,104). While there may be
some beneﬁt in prevention of amputa-
tion in selected chronic neuroischemic
ulcers, recent studies have shown no
beneﬁt in healing DFUs in the absence of
ischemia and/or infection (98,105).
Topical oxygen therapy has been stud-
ied rather vigorously in recent years, with
several high-quality RCTs and at least ﬁve
systematic reviews and meta-analyses all
supporting its efﬁcacy in healing chronic
DFUs at 12 weeks (96,97,106–110) Three
Table 12.2—Categories of advanced wound therapies
Negative-pressure wound therapy
Standard electrically powered
Mechanically powered
Oxygen therapies
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy
Topical oxygen therapy
Oxygen-releasing sprays, dressings
Biophysical
Electrical stimulation, diathermy
Pulsed electromagnetic ﬁelds, pulsed radiofrequency energy
Low-frequency noncontact ultrasound
Extracorporeal shock wave therapy
Growth factors
Becaplermin: platelet-derived growth factor
Fibroblast growth factor
Epidermal growth factor
Autologous blood products
Platelet-rich plasma
Leukocyte, platelet, ﬁbrin multilayered patches
Whole blood clot
Acellular matrix tissues
Xenograft dermis
Bovine dermis
Xenograft acellular matrices
Small intestine submucosa
Porcine urinary bladder matrix
Ovine forestomach
Equine pericardium
Fish skin graft
Bovine collagen
Bilayered dermal regeneration matrix
Human dermis products
Human pericardium
Placental tissues
Amniotic tissues/amniotic ﬂuid
Umbilical cord
Bioengineered allogeneic cellular therapies
Bilayered skin equivalent (human keratinocytes and ﬁbroblasts)
Dermal replacement therapy (human ﬁbroblasts)
Stem cell therapies
Autogenous: bone marrow–derived stem cells
Allogeneic: amniotic matrix with mesenchymal stem cells
Miscellaneous active dressings
Hyaluronic acid, honey dressings, etc.
Sucrose octasulfate dressing
Adapted with permission from Frykberg and Banks (95).
S240
Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

types of topical oxygen devices are avail-
able, including continuous-delivery, low-
constant-pressure, and cyclical-pressure
modalities. Importantly, topical oxygen
therapy devices provide for home-based
therapy rather than the need for daily
visits to specialized centers. Very high
participation with very few reported ad-
verse events combined with improved
healing rates makes this therapy an-
other attractive option for advanced
wound care.
If DFUs fail to heal despite appropriate
wound care, adjunctive advanced thera-
pies should be instituted and are best man-
aged in an interprofessional manner. Once
healed, all individuals should be enrolled in
a formal comprehensive prevention pro-
gram focused on reducing the incidence of
recurrent ulcerations and subsequent am-
putations (80,111,112).
References
1. Solomon SD, Chew E, Duh EJ, et al. Diabetic
retinopathy:
a
position
statement
by
the
American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care
2017;40:412–418
2. Nathan DM, Genuth S, Lachin J, et al.; Diabetes
Control and Complications Trial Research Group.
The effect of intensive treatment of diabetes on
the development and progression of long-term
complications in insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus. N Engl J Med 1993;329:977–986
3. Stratton IM, Kohner EM, Aldington SJ, et al.
UKPDS
50:
risk
factors
for
incidence
and
progression of retinopathy in Type II diabetes
over 6 years from diagnosis. Diabetologia 2001;
44:156–163
4. Estacio RO, McFarling E, Biggerstaff S, Jeffers
BW, Johnson D, Schrier RW. Overt albuminuria
predicts diabetic retinopathy in Hispanics with
NIDDM. Am J Kidney Dis 1998;31:947–953
5. Yau JW, Rogers SL, Kawasaki R, et al.; Meta-
Analysis for Eye Disease (META-EYE) Study
Group. Global prevalence and major risk factors
of diabetic retinopathy. Diabetes Care 2012;35:
556–564
6. Eid S, Sas KM, Abcouwer SF, et al. New
insights into the mechanisms of diabetic com-
plications: role of lipids and lipid metabolism.
Diabetologia 2019;62:1539–1549
7. UK
Prospective
Diabetes
Study
(UKPDS)
Group. Intensive blood-glucose control with
sulphonylureas or insulin compared with con-
ventional treatment and risk of complications in
patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 33). Lancet
1998;352:837–853
8. Chew EY, Ambrosius WT, Davis MD, et al.;
ACCORD Study Group; ACCORD Eye Study Group.
Effects of medical therapies on retinopathy
progression in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med
2010;363:233–244
9. Gubitosi-Klug RA, Sun W, Cleary PA, et al.;
Writing Team for the DCCT/EDIC Research Group.
Effects of prior intensive insulin therapy and risk
factors on patient-reported visual function out-
comes in the Diabetes Control and Complications
Trial/Epidemiology
of
Diabetes
Interventions
and Complications (DCCT/EDIC) cohort. JAMA
Ophthalmol 2016;134:137–145
10. Aiello LP, Sun W, Das A, et al.; DCCT/EDIC
Research Group. Intensive diabetes therapy and
ocular surgery in type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med
2015;372:1722–1733
11. Bethel MA, Diaz R, Castellana N, Bhattacharya
I, Gerstein HC, Lakshmanan MC. HbA1c change and
diabetic retinopathy during GLP-1 receptor agonist
cardiovascular outcome trials: a meta-analysis and
meta-regression. Diabetes Care 2021;44:290–296
12. Dabelea D, Stafford JM, Mayer-Davis EJ,
et al.; SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Research
Group. Association of type 1 diabetes vs type 2
diabetes
diagnosed
during
childhood
and
adolescence with complications during teenage
years and young adulthood. JAMA 2017;317:
825–835
13. Agardh E, Tababat-Khani P. Adopting 3-year
screening intervals for sight-threatening retinal
vascular lesions in type 2 diabetic subjects
without retinopathy. Diabetes Care 2011;34:
1318–1319
14. Nathan DM, Bebu I, Hainsworth D, et al.;
DCCT/EDIC
Research
Group.
Frequency
of
evidence-based screening for retinopathy in type 1
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;376:1507–1516
15. Silva PS, Horton MB, Clary D, et al.
Identiﬁcation of diabetic retinopathy and un-
gradable image rate with ultrawide ﬁeld imaging
in a national teleophthalmology program.
Ophthalmology 2016;123:1360–1367
16. Bragge P, Gruen RL, Chau M, Forbes A,
Taylor HR. Screening for presence or absence
of diabetic retinopathy: a meta-analysis. Arch
Ophthalmol 2011;129:435–444
17. Walton OB 4th, Garoon RB, Weng CY, et al.
Evaluation of automated teleretinal screening
program for diabetic retinopathy. JAMA Ophthalmol
2016;134:204–209
18. Daskivich LP, Vasquez C, Martinez C Jr, Tseng
CH, Mangione CM. Implementation and evaluation
of a large-scale teleretinal diabetic retinopathy
screening program in the Los Angeles County
Department of Health Services. JAMA Intern Med
2017;177:642–649
19. Sim DA, Mitry D, Alexander P, et al. The
evolution of teleophthalmology programs in the
United Kingdom: beyond diabetic retinopathy
screening. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2016;10:308–
317
20. Abramoff MD, Lavin PT, Birch M, Shah N,
Folk JC. Pivotal trial of an autonomous AI-based
diagnostic system for detection of diabetic
retinopathy in primary care ofﬁces. NPJ Digit
Med 2018;1:39
21. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. K200667
- 510(k) Premarket notiﬁcation. 2020. Accessed
8 September 2023. Available from https://www.
accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfpmn/
pmn.cfm?ID=K200667
22. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA
permits marketing of artiﬁcial intelligence-based
device to detect certain diabetes-related eye
problems. 2018. Accessed 8 September 2023.
Available from https://www.fda.gov/news
-events/press-announcements/fda-permits
-marketing-artiﬁcial-intelligence-based-device
-detect-certain-diabetes-related-eye
23. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. K221183
- 510(k) Premarket notiﬁcation. 2022. Accessed
8 September 2023. Available from https://www
.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfpmn/
pmn.cfm?ID=K221183
24. Gunderson EP, Lewis CE, Tsai AL, et al. A 20-
year prospective study of childbearing and in-
cidence of diabetes in young women, controlling
for glycemia before conception: the Coronary
Artery
Risk
Development
in
Young
Adults
(CARDIA) Study. Diabetes 2007;56:2990–2996
25. Widyaputri F, Rogers SL, Kandasamy R, Shub
A, Symons RCA, Lim LL. Global estimates of
diabetic retinopathy prevalence and progression
in pregnant women with preexisting diabetes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA
Ophthalmol 2022;140:486–494
26. Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
Research Group. Effect of pregnancy on micro-
vascular complications in the diabetes control
and complications trial. Diabetes Care 2000;23:
1084–1091
27. The Diabetic Retinopathy Study Research
Group. Preliminary report on effects of photo-
coagulation therapy. Am J Ophthalmol 1976;81:
383–396
28. Early
Treatment
Diabetic
Retinopathy
Study research group. Photocoagulation for
diabetic macular edema. Early Treatment
Diabetic Retinopathy Study report number 1.
Arch Ophthalmol 1985;103:1796–1806
29. Gross JG, Glassman AR, Jampol LM, et al.;
Writing Committee for the Diabetic Retinopathy
Clinical Research Network. Panretinal photo-
coagulation vs intravitreous ranibizumab for
proliferative diabetic retinopathy: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA 2015;314:2137–2146
30. Sivaprasad S, Prevost AT, Vasconcelos JC,
et al.; CLARITY Study Group. Clinical efﬁcacy of
intravitreal aﬂibercept versus panretinal photo-
coagulation for best corrected visual acuity in
patients with proliferative diabetic retinopathy at
52 weeks (CLARITY):
a multicentre, single-
blinded, randomised, controlled, phase 2b, non-
inferiority trial. Lancet 2017;389:2193–2203
31. Maturi RK, Glassman AR, Josic K, et al.; DRCR
Retina Network. Effect of intravitreous anti-
vascular endothelial growth factor vs sham
treatment for prevention of vision-threatening
complications of diabetic retinopathy: the
Protocol W randomized clinical trial. JAMA
Ophthalmol 2021;139:701–712
32. Elman MJ, Bressler NM, Qin H, et al.;
Diabetic Retinopathy Clinical Research Network.
Expanded 2-year follow-up of ranibizumab plus
prompt or deferred laser or triamcinolone plus
prompt
laser
for
diabetic
macular
edema.
Ophthalmology 2011;118:609–614
33. Mitchell P, Bandello F, Schmidt-Erfurth U,
et al.; RESTORE study group. The RESTORE study:
ranibizumab monotherapy or combined with
laser versus laser monotherapy for diabetic
macular edema. Ophthalmology 2011;118:615–625
34. Wells JA, Glassman AR, Ayala AR, et al.;
Diabetic Retinopathy Clinical Research Network.
Aﬂibercept, bevacizumab, or ranibizumab for
diabetic macular edema. N Engl J Med 2015;
372:1193–1203
35. Baker CW, Glassman AR, Beaulieu WT, et al.;
DRCR Retina Network. Effect of initial management
with aﬂibercept vs laser photocoagulation vs
observation on vision loss among patients with
diabetic macular edema involving the center of the
diabetesjournals.org/care
Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care
S241
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

macula and good visual acuity: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA 2019;321:1880–1894
36. Chew EY, Davis MD, Danis RP, et al.; Action
to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes Eye
Study Research Group. The effects of medical
management on the progression of diabetic
retinopathy in persons with type 2 diabetes: the
Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes
(ACCORD) eye study. Ophthalmology 2014;121:
2443–2451
37. Shi R, Zhao L, Wang F, et al. Effects of lipid-
lowering agents on diabetic retinopathy: a meta-
analysis and systematic review. Int J Ophthalmol
2018;11:287–295
38. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
National Diabetes Statistics Report: Coexisting
Conditions and Complications, 2022. Accessed 7
November 2023. Available from https://www.
cdc.gov/diabetes/data/statistics-report/coexisting
-conditions-complications.html
39. Mazhar K, Varma R, Choudhury F, McKean-
Cowdin R, Shtir CJ; Los Angeles Latino Eye Study
Group. Severity of diabetic retinopathy and
health-related quality of life: the Los Angeles
Latino Eye Study. Ophthalmology 2011;118:
649–655
40. Ang L, Jaiswal M, Martin C, Pop-Busui R.
Glucose control and diabetic neuropathy: lessons
from recent large clinical trials. Curr Diab Rep
2014;14:528
41. Martin CL, Albers JW; DCCT/EDIC Research
Group. Neuropathy and related ﬁndings in the
diabetes
control
and
complications
trial/
epidemiology of diabetes interventions and
complications study. Diabetes Care 2014;37:
31–38
42. Ismail-Beigi F, Craven T, Banerji MA, et al.;
ACCORD trial group. Effect of intensive treatment
of hyperglycaemia on microvascular outcomes in
type 2 diabetes: an analysis of the ACCORD
randomised trial. Lancet 2010;376:419–430
43. Bashir M, Elhadd T, Dabbous Z, et al. Optimal
glycaemic and blood pressure but not lipid
targets are related to a lower prevalence of
diabetic microvascular complications. Diabetes
Metab Syndr 2021;15:102241
44. Look AHEAD Research Group. Effects of a
long-term lifestyle modiﬁcation programme on
peripheral neuropathy in overweight or obese
adults with type 2 diabetes: the Look AHEAD
study. Diabetologia 2017;60:980–988
45. Callaghan BC, Reynolds EL, Banerjee M,
et al. Dietary weight loss in people with severe
obesity
stabilizes neuropathy
and improves
symptomatology. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2021;
29:2108–2118
46. Pop-Busui R, Boulton AJ, Feldman EL, et al.
Diabetic neuropathy: a position statement by the
American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care
2017;40:136–154
47. Freeman R. Not all neuropathy in diabetes is
of diabetic etiology: differential diagnosis of
diabetic neuropathy. Curr Diab Rep 2009;9:
423–431
48. Pop-Busui R, Evans GW, Gerstein HC, et al.;
Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes
Study Group. Effects of cardiac autonomic
dysfunction on mortality risk in the Action to
Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes (ACCORD)
trial. Diabetes Care 2010;33:1578–1584
49. Pop-Busui R, Cleary PA, Braffett BH, et al.;
DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Association between
cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy and left
ventricular dysfunction: DCCT/EDIC study (Diabetes
Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of
Diabetes Interventions and Complications). J Am
Coll Cardiol 2013;61:447–454
50. Smith AG, Lessard M, Reyna S, Doudova M,
Singleton JR. The diagnostic utility of Sudoscan
for distal symmetric peripheral neuropathy. J
Diabetes Complications 2014;28:511–516
51. Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
(DCCT) Research Group. Effect of intensive
diabetes treatment on nerve conduction in the
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial. Ann
Neurol 1995;38:869–880
52. The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
Research Group. The effect of intensive diabetes
therapy on measures of autonomic nervous
system function in the Diabetes Control and
Complications Trial (DCCT). Diabetologia 1998;
41:416–423
53. Albers JW, Herman WH, Pop-Busui R, et al.;
Diabetes
Control
and
Complications
Trial/
Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and
Complications Research Group. Effect of prior
intensive insulin treatment during the Diabetes
Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) on
peripheral neuropathy in type 1 diabetes during
the Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and
Complications
(EDIC)
Study.
Diabetes
Care
2010;33:1090–1096
54. Pop-Busui R, Low PA, Waberski BH, et al.;
DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Effects of prior
intensive insulin therapy on cardiac autonomic
nervous system function in type 1 diabetes
mellitus: the Diabetes Control and Complications
Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and
Complications study (DCCT/EDIC). Circulation
2009;119:2886–2893
55. Callaghan BC, Little AA, Feldman EL, Hughes
RA. Enhanced glucose control for preventing and
treating diabetic neuropathy. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2012;6:CD007543
56. Pop-Busui R, Lu J, Brooks MM, et al.; BARI
2D Study Group. Impact of glycemic control
strategies on the progression of diabetic peripheral
neuropathy in the Bypass Angioplasty Reva-
scularization Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D)
cohort. Diabetes Care 2013;36:3208–3215
57. Tang Y, Shah H, Bueno Junior CR, et al.
Intensive risk factor management and cardio-
vascular
autonomic
neuropathy
in
type
2
diabetes: the ACCORD trial. Diabetes Care 2021;
44:164–173
58. Callaghan BC, Xia R, Banerjee M, et al.;
Health ABC Study. Metabolic syndrome com-
ponents
are
associated
with
symptomatic
polyneuropathy independent of glycemic status.
Diabetes Care 2016;39:801–807
59. Andersen ST, Witte DR, Dalsgaard EM, et al.
Risk factors for incident diabetic polyneuropathy
in a cohort with screen-detected type 2 diabetes
followed
for
13
years:
ADDITION-Denmark.
Diabetes Care 2018;41:1068–1075
60. Afshinnia F, Reynolds EL, Rajendiran TM,
et al. Serum lipidomic determinants of human
diabetic neuropathy in type 2 diabetes. Ann Clin
Transl Neurol 2022;9:1392–1404
61. Lu Y, Xing P, Cai X, et al. Prevalence and risk
factors for diabetic peripheral neuropathy in type 2
diabetic patients from 14 countries: estimates of
the INTERPRET-DD study. Front Public Health
2020;8:534372
62. Sadosky A, Schaefer C, Mann R, et al. Burden
of
illness
associated
with
painful
diabetic
peripheral neuropathy among adults seeking
treatment in the US: results from a retrospective
chart review and cross-sectional survey. Diabetes
Metab Syndr Obes 2013;6:79–92
63. Waldfogel JM, Nesbit SA, Dy SM, et al.
Pharmacotherapy
for
diabetic
peripheral
neuropathy pain and quality of life: a systematic
review. Neurology 2017;88:1958–1967
64. Price R, Smith D, Franklin G, et al. Oral and
topical
treatment
of
painful diabetic
poly-
neuropathy: practice guideline update summary:
report of the AAN Guideline Subcommittee.
Neurology 2022;98:31–43
65. Pop-Busui R, Ang L, Boulton AJM, et al.
Diagnosis and Treatment of Painful Diabetic
Peripheral Neuropathy. Arlington, VA, American
Diabetes Association, 2022
66. Tesfaye S, Sloan G, Petrie J, et al.; OPTION-
DM trial group. Comparison of amitriptyline
supplemented with pregabalin, pregabalin
supplemented with amitriptyline, and duloxe-
tine supplemented with pregabalin for the
treatment of diabetic peripheral neuropathic
pain (OPTION-DM): a multicentre, double-
blind, randomised crossover trial. Lancet 2022;
400:680–690
67. Dworkin RH, Jensen MP, Gammaitoni AR,
Olaleye DO, Galer BS. Symptom proﬁles differ in
patients with neuropathic versus non-neuropathic
pain. J Pain 2007;8:118–126
68. Barbano RL, Herrmann DN, Hart-Gouleau S,
Pennella-Vaughan J, Lodewick PA, Dworkin RH.
Effectiveness, tolerability, and impact on quality
of life of the 5% lidocaine patch in diabetic
polyneuropathy. Arch Neurol 2004;61:914–918
69. Briasoulis A, Silver A, Yano Y, Bakris GL.
Orthostatic hypotension associated with bar-
oreceptor dysfunction: treatment approaches. J
Clin Hypertens (Greenwich) 2014;16:141–148
70. Figueroa JJ, Basford JR, Low PA. Preventing
and treating orthostatic hypotension: as easy as
A, B, C. Cleve Clin J Med 2010;77:298–306
71. Jordan
J,
Fanciulli
A,
Tank
J,
et
al.
Management of supine hypertension in patients
with neurogenic orthostatic hypotension: scientiﬁc
statement of the American Autonomic Society,
European Federation of Autonomic Societies, and
the European Society of Hypertension. J Hypertens
2019;37:1541–1546
72. Camilleri M, Parkman HP, ShaﬁMA, Abell TL;
American College of Gastroenterology. Clinical
guideline: management of gastroparesis. Am J
Gastroenterol 2013;108:18–37; quiz 38
73. Parrish CR, Pastors JG. Nutritional manage-
ment of gastroparesis in people with diabetes.
Diabetes Spectr 2007;20:231–234
74. Parkman HP, Yates KP, Hasler WL, et al.
Dietary intake and nutritional deﬁciencies in
patients with diabetic or idiopathic gastroparesis.
Gastroenterology 2011;141:486–498, 498.e1–498.e7
75. Olausson EA, St€orsrud S, Grundin H, Isaksson
M, Attvall S, Simren M. A small particle size diet
reduces upper gastrointestinal symptoms in
patients with diabetic gastroparesis: a randomized
controlled trial. Am J Gastroenterol 2014;109:
375–385
76. Umpierrez GE, Ed. Therapy for Diabetes
Mellitus and Related Disorders. 6th ed. Alexandria,
VA, American Diabetes Association, 2014
S242
Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

77. Sugumar
A,
Singh
A,
Pasricha
PJ.
A
systematic review of the efﬁcacy of domperidone
for the treatment of diabetic gastroparesis. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2008;6:726–733
78. Maganti K, Onyemere K, Jones MP. Oral
erythromycin and symptomatic relief of gas-
troparesis: a systematic review. Am J Gastro-
enterol 2003;98:259–263
79. McCallum RW, Snape W, Brody F, Wo J,
Parkman HP, Nowak T. Gastric electrical stimulation
with Enterra therapy improves symptoms from
diabetic gastroparesis in a prospective study.
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2010;8:947–954;
quiz e116
80. Boulton AJ, Armstrong DG, Albert SF, et al.;
American Diabetes Association; American Asso-
ciation of Clinical Endocrinologists. Compre-
hensive foot examination and risk assessment: a
report of the task force of the foot care interest
group of the American Diabetes Association, with
endorsement by the American Association of
Clinical Endocrinologists. Diabetes Care 2008;31:
1679–1685
81. Schaper NC, van Netten JJ, Apelqvist J, Bus
SA, Hinchliffe RJ; IWGDF Editorial Board. Practical
guidelines on the prevention and management
of diabetic foot disease (IWGDF 2019 update).
Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2020;36(Suppl. 1):e3266
82. Reiber GE, Vileikyte L, Boyko EJ, et al. Causal
pathways for incident lower-extremity ulcers
in patients with diabetes from two settings.
Diabetes Care 1999;22:157–162
83. Pham H, Armstrong DG, Harvey C, Harkless
LB, Giurini JM, Veves A. Screening techniques to
identify people at high risk for diabetic foot
ulceration:
a
prospective
multicenter
trial.
Diabetes Care 2000;23:606–611
84. Hingorani A, LaMuraglia GM, Henke P, et al.
The management of diabetic foot: a clinical
practice guideline by the Society for Vascular
Surgery in collaboration with the American
Podiatric Medical Association and the Society for
Vascular Medicine. J Vasc Surg 2016;63(Suppl.):
3S–21S
85. Conte MS, Bradbury AW, Kolh P, et al. Global
vascular guidelines on the management of
chronic limb-threatening ischemia. Eur J Vasc
Endovasc Surg 2019;58:S1–S109.e133
86. American Diabetes Association. Peripheral
arterial disease in people with diabetes. Diabetes
Care 2003;26:3333–3341
87. Reaney M, Gladwin T, Churchill S. Information
about foot care provided to people with diabetes
with
or
without their
partners: impact
on
recommended foot care behavior. Appl Psychol
Health Well-Being 2022;14:465–482
88. Heng ML, Kwan YH, Ilya N, et al. A
collaborative approach in patient education for
diabetes foot and wound care: a pragmatic
randomised controlled trial. Int Wound J 2020;
17:1678–1686
89. Bus SA, Lavery LA, Monteiro-Soares M, et al.;
International Working Group on the Diabetic
Foot. Guidelines on the prevention of foot ulcers
in persons with diabetes (IWGDF 2019 update).
Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2020;36(Suppl. 1):e3269
90. Goodall RJ, Ellauzi J, Tan MKH, Onida S,
Davies AH, Shalhoub J. A systematic review of the
impact of foot care education on self efﬁcacy and
self care in patients with diabetes. Eur J Vasc
Endovasc Surg 2020;60:282–292
91. Yuncken J, Williams CM, Stolwyk RJ, Haines
TP. People with diabetes do not learn and recall
their diabetes foot education: a cohort study.
Endocrine 2018;62:250–258
92. Walton DV, Edmonds ME, Bates M, Vas PRJ,
Petrova NL, Manu CA. People living with diabetes
are unaware of their foot risk status or why they
are referred to a multidisciplinary foot team. J
Wound Care 2021;30:598–603
93. Bus SA, van Deursen RW, Armstrong DG,
Lewis JE, Caravaggi CF; International Working
Group on the Diabetic Foot. Footwear and
ofﬂoading interventions to prevent and heal foot
ulcers and reduce plantar pressure in patients
with diabetes: a systematic review. Diabetes
Metab Res Rev 2016;32(Suppl. 1):99–118
94. Rogers LC, Frykberg RG, Armstrong DG, et al.
The Charcot foot in diabetes. Diabetes Care
2011;34:2123–2129
95. Frykberg RG, Banks J. Challenges in the
treatment of chronic wounds. Adv Wound Care
(New Rochelle) 2015;4:560–582
96. Carter MJ, Frykberg RG, Oropallo A, et al.
Efﬁcacy of topical wound oxygen therapy in
healing chronic diabetic foot ulcers: systematic
review and meta-analysis. Adv Wound Care (New
Rochelle) 2023;12:177–186
97. Frykberg RG, Franks PJ, Edmonds M, et al.;
TWO2 Study Group. A multinational, multicenter,
randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled
trial to evaluate the efﬁcacy of cyclical topical
wound oxygen (TWO2) therapy in the treatment
of chronic diabetic foot ulcers: the TWO2 study.
Diabetes Care 2020;43:616–624
98. Boulton AJM, Armstrong DG, L€ondahl M,
et al. New Evidence-Based Therapies for Complex
Diabetic Foot Wounds. Arlington, VA, American
Diabetes Association, 2022
99. Sheehan P, Jones P, Caselli A, Giurini JM,
Veves A. Percent change in wound area of
diabetic foot ulcers over a 4-week period is a
robust predictor of complete healing in a
12-week prospective trial. Diabetes Care 2003;26:
1879–1882
100. Blume PA, Walters J, Payne W, Ayala J,
Lantis J. Comparison of negative pressure wound
therapy using vacuum-assisted closure with
advanced moist wound therapy in the treatment
of diabetic foot ulcers: a multicenter randomized
controlled trial. Diabetes Care 2008;31:631–636
101. Argenta LC, Morykwas MJ, Marks MW,
DeFranzo AJ, Molnar JA, David LR. Vacuum-
assisted closure: state of clinic art. Plast Reconstr
Surg 2006;117(Suppl.):127S–142S
102. L€ondahl
M,
Katzman
P,
Nilsson
A,
Hammarlund C. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy
facilitates healing of chronic foot ulcers in patients
with diabetes. Diabetes Care 2010;33:998–1003
103. Santema KTB, Stoekenbroek RM, Koelemay
MJW, et al.; DAMO2CLES Study Group. Hyperbaric
oxygen therapy in the treatment of ischemic lower-
extremity ulcers in patients with diabetes: results of
the DAMO2CLES multicenter randomized clinical
trial. Diabetes Care 2018;41:112–119
104. Fedorko L, Bowen JM, Jones W, et al.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy does not reduce
indications for amputation in patients with
diabetes with nonhealing ulcers of the lower
limb: a prospective, double-blind, randomized
controlled clinical trial. Diabetes Care 2016;39:
392–399
105. Lalieu
RC,
Brouwer
RJ,
Ubbink
DT,
Hoencamp R, Bol Raap R, van Hulst RA. Hyperbaric
oxygen therapy for nonischemic diabetic ulcers: a
systematic review. Wound Repair Regen 2020;28:
266–275
106. Niederauer MQ, Michalek JE, Liu Q, Papas
KK,
Lavery
LA,
Armstrong
DG.
Continuous
diffusion of oxygen improves diabetic foot ulcer
healing when compared with a placebo control: a
randomised, double-blind, multicentre study. J
Wound Care 2018;27(Suppl. 9):S30–S45
107. Serena TE, Bullock NM, Cole W, et al.
Topical oxygen therapy in the treatment of
diabetic foot ulcers: a multicentre, open, ran-
domised controlled clinical trial. J Wound Care
2021;30(Suppl. 5):S7–S14
108. Sun XK, Li R, Yang XL, Yuan L. Efﬁcacy and
safety of topical oxygen therapy for diabetic foot
ulcers: an updated systematic review and meta-
analysis. Int Wound J 2022;19:2200–2209
109. Frykberg
RG.
Topical
wound
oxygen
therapy in the treatment of chronic diabetic foot
ulcers. Medicina (Kaunas) 2021;57:917
110. Sethi A, Khambhayta Y, Vas P. Topical
oxygen therapy for healing diabetic foot ulcers:
a systematic review and meta-analysis of ran-
domised control trials. Health Sci Rep 2022;
3:100028
111. van Netten JJ, Price PE, Lavery LA, et al.;
International Working Group on the Diabetic
Foot. Prevention of foot ulcers in the at-risk
patient with diabetes: a systematic review.
Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2016;32(Suppl. 1):84–98
112. Frykberg RG, Vileikyte L, Boulton AJM,
Armstrong DG. The at-risk diabetic foot: time
to focus on prevention. Diabetes Care 2022;45:
e144–e145
diabetesjournals.org/care
Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care
S243
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

13. Older Adults: Standards of
Care in Diabetes—2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S244–S257 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S013
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” in-
cludes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to
provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guide-
lines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional
Practice Committee, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for
updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a
detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the
evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full
list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction
and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are
invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
Recommendations
13.1 Consider the assessment of medical, psychological, functional (self-
management abilities), and social domains in older adults with diabetes to
provide a framework to determine goals and therapeutic approaches for diabetes
management. B
13.2 Screen for geriatric syndromes (e.g., cognitive impairment, depression,
urinary incontinence, falls, persistent pain, and frailty) and polypharmacy in
older adults with diabetes, as they may affect diabetes self-management and
diminish quality of life. B
Diabetes is a highly prevalent health condition in the aging population. Over one-
quarter of people over the age of 65 years have diabetes and one-half of older
adults have prediabetes (1,2). The number of older adults living with these condi-
tions is expected to increase rapidly in the coming decades. Diabetes in older
adults is a highly heterogeneous condition. While type 2 diabetes predominates in
the older population as in the younger population, improvements in insulin deliv-
ery, technology, and care over the last few decades have led to increasing numbers
of people with childhood and adult-onset type 1 diabetes surviving and thriving
into their later decades. Diabetes management in older adults requires regular as-
sessment of medical, psychological, functional, and social domains. When assessing
older adults with diabetes, it is important to accurately categorize the type of dia-
betes as well as other factors, including diabetes duration, the presence of compli-
cations, and treatment-related concerns, such as fear of hypoglycemia. Screening
for diabetes complications in older adults should be individualized and periodically
revisited, as the results of screening tests may impact treatment goals and thera-
peutic approaches (3–5). Older adults with diabetes have higher rates of functional
disability, accelerated muscle loss, and coexisting illnesses, such as hypertension,
chronic kidney disease, coronary heart disease, and stroke, and of premature death
than those without diabetes. At the same time, older adults with diabetes
*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee. 13. Older adults:
Standards of Care in Diabetes—2024. Diabetes
Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S244–S257
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
13. OLDER ADULTS
S244
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

also require greater caregiver support
and are at greater risk than other older
adults for several common geriatric syn-
dromes such as cognitive impairment,
depression, urinary incontinence, injuri-
ous falls, persistent pain, and frailty as
well as polypharmacy (1). These condi-
tions may impact older adults’ diabetes
self-management abilities and quality
of life if left unaddressed (2,6,7). See
Section 4, “Comprehensive Medical Evalua-
tion and Assessment of Comorbidities,”
for the full range of issues to consider
when caring for older adults with diabetes.
The comprehensive assessment de-
scribed above provides a framework to de-
termine goals and therapeutic approaches
(8–10), including whether referral for dia-
betes self-management education is ap-
propriate (when complicating factors arise
or when transitions in care occur) or
whether the current plan is too complex
for the individual’s self-management ability
or the caregivers providing care (11). Par-
ticular attention should be paid to com-
plications that can develop over short
periods of time and/or would signiﬁcantly
impair functional status, such as visual and
lower-extremity complications. Please refer
to the American Diabetes Association
(ADA) consensus report “Diabetes in Older
Adults” for details (3).
NEUROCOGNITIVE FUNCTION
Recommendation
13.3 Screening for early detection of
mild cognitive impairment or demen-
tia should be performed for adults
65 years of age or older at the initial
visit, annually, and as appropriate. B
Older adults with diabetes are at higher
risk of cognitive decline and institutionali-
zation (12,13). The presentation of cogni-
tive impairment ranges from subtle
executive dysfunction to memory loss
and overt dementia. People with diabe-
tes have higher incidences of all-cause
dementia, Alzheimer disease, and vascu-
lar dementia than people with normal
glucose tolerance (14). Poor glycemic
management is associated with a decline
in cognitive function (15,16), and longer
duration of diabetes is associated with
worsening cognitive function. There are
ongoing studies evaluating whether
lifestyle interventions may help to main-
tain cognitive function in older adults
(17). However, studies examining the ef-
fects of diabetes prevention or intensive
glycemic and blood pressure manage-
ment to achieve speciﬁc goals have not
demonstrated a reduction in brain func-
tion decline (18,19). In observational stud-
ies as well as post hoc analyses from
randomized clinical trials, certain glucose-
lowering drugs, such as metformin, thia-
zolidinediones, and glucagon-like peptide 1
(GLP-1) receptor agonists have shown
small beneﬁts on slowing progression of
cognitive dysfunction (20). Cardiovascular
risk factors are also associated with an in-
creased risk of cognitive decline and de-
mentia. Control of blood pressure and
cholesterol lowering with statins have
been associated with a reduced risk of inci-
dent dementia and are, thus, particularly
important in older adults with diabetes.
Recently, the U.S. Food and Drug Ad-
ministration (FDA) has approved two new
anti-amyloid monoclonal antibodies for
the treatment of early Alzheimer disease
(21). These drugs lower the amyloid bur-
den in the brain and appear to slow cog-
nitive decline in the populations tested.
Whether these drugs will be useful in
other populations including older adults
with diabetes remains to be determined.
Despite the paucity of therapies to
prevent or remedy cognitive decline,
identifying cognitive impairment early has
important implications for diabetes care.
The presence of cognitive impairment can
make it challenging for clinicians to help
people with diabetes reach individualized
glycemic, blood pressure, and lipid goals.
Cognitive dysfunction may make it difﬁ-
cult for individuals to perform complex
self-care tasks (22), such as monitoring
glucose and adjusting insulin doses. It can
also hinder their ability to appropriately
maintain the timing of meals and content
of the diet. These factors increase risk for
hypoglycemia, which, in turn, can worsen
cognitive function. When clinicians are
providing care for people with cognitive
dysfunction, it is critical to simplify care
plans and to facilitate and engage the ap-
propriate support structure to assist indi-
viduals in all aspects of care.
Older adults with diabetes should be
carefully screened and monitored for
cognitive impairment (2). Several simple
assessment tools are available to screen
for cognitive impairment (22,23), such as
the Mini-Mental State Examination (24),
Mini-Cog (25), and the Montreal Cogni-
tive Assessment (26), which may help to
identify individuals requiring neuropsy-
chological evaluation, particularly when
dementia is suspected (i.e., in those
experiencing memory loss, a decrease in
executive function, and declines in their
basic and instrumental activities of daily
living). Annual screening is indicated for
adults 65 years of age or older for early
detection of mild cognitive impairment
or dementia (4,27). Screening for cogni-
tive impairment should additionally be
considered when an individual presents
with a signiﬁcant decline in clinical status
due to increased problems with self-care
activities and medication management,
such as errors in calculating insulin dose,
difﬁculty counting carbohydrates, skipped
meals, skipped insulin doses, and difﬁculty
recognizing, preventing, or treating hypo-
glycemia. People who screen positive for
cognitive impairment should receive diag-
nostic assessment as appropriate, including
referral to a behavioral health professional
for formal cognitive/neuropsychological
evaluation (28).
HYPOGLYCEMIA
Recommendations
13.4 Because older adults with dia-
betes have a greater risk of hypogly-
cemia, especially when treated with
hypoglycemic agents (e.g., sulfonylur-
eas, meglitinides, and insulin), than
younger adults, episodes of hypogly-
cemia should be ascertained and ad-
dressed at routine visits. B
13.5 For older adults with type 1 dia-
betes, continuous glucose monitoring
is recommended to reduce hypogly-
cemia. A
13.6 For older adults with type 2 dia-
betes on insulin therapy, continuous
glucose monitoring should be consid-
ered to improve glycemic outcomes
and reduce hypoglycemia. B
13.7 For older adults with type 1 dia-
betes, consider the use of automated
insulin delivery (AID) systems A and
other advanced insulin delivery devices
such as connected pens E to reduce
risk of hypoglycemia, based on indi-
vidual ability and support system.
Older adults are at higher risk of hypogly-
cemia
for
many
reasons,
including
erratic meal intake, insulin deﬁciency ne-
cessitating insulin therapy, and progres-
sive renal insufﬁciency (29). As described
diabetesjournals.org/care
Older Adults
S245
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

above, older adults have higher rates of
unidentiﬁed cognitive impairment and
dementia, leading to difﬁculties in adher-
ing to complex self-care activities (e.g.,
glucose monitoring and insulin dose ad-
justment). Cognitive decline has been
associated with increased risk of hypogly-
cemia, and conversely, severe hypoglyce-
mia has been linked to increased risk of
dementia (30–32). Therefore, as dis-
cussed in Recommendation 13.3, it is im-
portant to routinely screen older adults
for cognitive impairment and dementia
and discuss ﬁndings with the individuals
and their caregivers.
People with diabetes and their care-
givers should be routinely queried about
hypoglycemia (e.g., selected questions
from the Diabetes Care Proﬁle) (33) and
impaired hypoglycemia awareness as dis-
cussed in Section 6, “Glycemic Goals and
Hypoglycemia.” Older adults can also be
stratiﬁed for future risk for hypoglycemia
with validated risk calculators (e.g., Kai-
ser Hypoglycemia Model) (34) and with
consideration of hypoglycemia risk fac-
tors (Table 6.5). An important step to
mitigate hypoglycemia risk is to deter-
mine whether the person with diabetes
is skipping meals or inadvertently repeat-
ing doses of their medications. Glycemic
goals and pharmacologic treatments may
need to be adjusted to minimize the oc-
currence of hypoglycemic events (2). This
recommendation is supported by results
from multiple randomized controlled tri-
als, such as the Action to Control Cardio-
vascular Risk in Diabetes (ACCORD) study
and the Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial
(VADT), which showed that intensive
treatment protocols aimed to achieve
an A1C <6.0% with complex drug plans
signiﬁcantly increased the risk for hypo-
glycemia requiring assistance compared
with standard treatment (35,36). How-
ever, these intensive treatment plans in-
cluded extensive use of insulin and
minimal use of GLP-1 receptor agonists,
and they preceded the availability of
sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2)
inhibitors.
Use of Continuous Glucose
Monitoring and Advanced Insulin
Delivery Devices
For older adults with type 1 diabetes,
continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) is
a useful approach to predicting and re-
ducing the risk of hypoglycemia (37). In
the Wireless Innovation in Seniors with
Diabetes Mellitus (WISDM) trial, adults
over 60 years of age with type 1 diabe-
tes were randomized to CGM or stan-
dard blood glucose monitoring. Over
6 months, use of CGM resulted in a small
but statistically signiﬁcant reduction in time
spent with hypoglycemia (glucose level
<70 mg/dL) compared with standard blood
glucose monitoring (adjusted treatment dif-
ference 1.9% [27 min/day]; 95% CI
2.8% to 1.1% [40 to 16 min/day];
P < 0.001) (38,39). Among secondary out-
comes, time spent in range between 70
and 180 mg/dL increased by 8% (95% CI
6.0–11.5) and glycemic variability (%CV) de-
creased. A 6-month extension of the trial
demonstrated that these beneﬁts were sus-
tained for up to a year (40). These and
other short-term trials are supported by ob-
servational data from the Diabetes Control
and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of
Diabetes Interventions and Complica-
tions (DCCT/EDIC) study indicating that
among older adults (mean age 58 years)
with long-standing type 1 diabetes, rou-
tine CGM and insulin pump use was as-
sociated with fewer hypoglycemic events
and hyperglycemic excursions and lower
A1C levels (41). While the current evi-
dence base for older adults is primarily
in type 1 diabetes, the evidence demon-
strating the clinical beneﬁts of CGM for
people with type 2 diabetes using insulin
is growing (42) (see Section 7, “Diabetes
Technology”). The DIAMOND (Multiple
Daily Injections and Continuous Glucose
Monitoring in Diabetes) study demon-
strated that in adults $60 years of age
with either type 1 or type 2 diabetes us-
ing multiple daily injections, CGM use
was associated with improved A1C and
reduced glycemic variability (43). Older
adults with physical or cognitive limita-
tions who require monitoring of blood
glucose by a surrogate or reside in group
homes or assisted living centers are
other populations for which CGM may
play a useful role.
The availability of accurate CGM devi-
ces that can communicate with insulin
pumps through Bluetooth has enabled
the development of advanced insulin
delivery algorithms for pumps. These al-
gorithms fall into two categories: pre-
dictive low-glucose suspend algorithms
that automatically shut off insulin deliv-
ery if a hypoglycemic event is imminent
and hybrid closed-loop algorithms that
automatically adjust insulin infusion rates
based on feedback from a CGM to keep
glucose levels in a goal range. Advanced
insulin delivery devices have been shown
to improve glycemic outcomes in both
children and adults with type 1 diabetes.
Most trials of these devices have included
a broad range of people with type 1 dia-
betes but relatively few older adults. Re-
cently, two small randomized controlled
trials in older adults have been published.
The Older Adult Closed Loop (ORACL) trial
in 30 older adults (mean age 67 years)
with type 1 diabetes found that an auto-
mated insulin delivery (AID) strategy was
associated with signiﬁcant improvements
in time in range compared with sensor-
augmented pump therapy (44). More-
over, they found small but signiﬁcant de-
creases in hypoglycemia with the AID
strategy. Boughton et al. (45) reported
results of an open-label, crossover de-
sign clinical trial in 37 older adults
($60 years) in which 16 weeks of
treatment with a hybrid closed-loop
advanced insulin delivery system was
compared with sensor-augmented pump
therapy. They found that hybrid closed-
loop insulin delivery improved the pro-
portion of time glucose was in range
largely due to decreases in hyperglyce-
mia. In contrast to the ORACL study, no
signiﬁcant differences in hypoglycemia
were observed. Both studies enrolled
older individuals whose blood glucose
was relatively well managed (mean A1C
7.4%), and both used a crossover de-
sign comparing hybrid closed-loop insulin
delivery to sensor-augmented pump ther-
apy. These trials provide the ﬁrst evidence
that older individuals with long-standing
type 1 diabetes can successfully use ad-
vanced insulin delivery technologies to im-
prove glycemic outcomes, as has been
seen in younger populations. A recent real
world evidence analysis of a Medicare
population (n = 4,243, 89% with type 1 di-
abetes, mean age 67.4 years) also indi-
cated that initiating hybrid closed-loop
insulin delivery was associated with im-
provements in mean glucose and a 10%
increase in time in range (46). Use of such
technologies should be periodically reas-
sessed, as the burden may outweigh the
beneﬁts in those with declining cognitive
or functional status.
TREATMENT GOALS
Recommendations
13.8a Older adults with diabetes
who are otherwise healthy with few
S246
Older Adults
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

and stable coexisting chronic illnesses
and intact cognitive function and func-
tional status should have lower glyce-
mic goals (such as A1C <7.0–7.5%
[<53–58 mmol/mol]). C
13.8b Older adults with diabetes and
intermediate or complex health are
clinically heterogeneous with variable
life expectancy. Selection of glycemic
goals should be individualized, with
less stringent goals (such as A1C <8.0%
[<64 mmol/mol]) for those with signif-
icant cognitive and/or functional limi-
tations, frailty, severe comorbidities,
and a less favorable risk-to-beneﬁt ra-
tio of diabetes medications. C
13.8c Older adults with very complex
or poor health receive minimal bene-
ﬁt from stringent glycemic control,
and clinicians should avoid reliance
on glycemic goals and instead focus
on avoiding hypoglycemia and symp-
tomatic hyperglycemia. C
13.9 Screening for diabetes complica-
tions should be individualized in older
adults with diabetes. Particular atten-
tion should be paid to complications
that would lead to impairment of func-
tional status or quality of life. C
13.10 Treatment of hypertension to
individualized goal levels is indi-
cated in most older adults with dia-
betes. B
13.11 Treatment of other cardiovas-
cular risk factors should be individu-
alized in older adults with diabetes,
considering the time frame of beneﬁt.
Lipid-lowering therapy and antiplate-
let agents may beneﬁt those with life
expectancies at least equal to the
time frame of primary prevention or
secondary intervention trials. E
The care of older adults with diabetes is
complicated by their clinical, cognitive,
and functional heterogeneity and their
varied prior experience with disease
management.
Some
older
individuals
may have developed diabetes years ear-
lier and have signiﬁcant complications,
others are newly diagnosed and may
have had years of undiagnosed diabetes
with resultant complications, and still,
other older adults may have truly recent-
onset disease with few or no complica-
tions (47). Some older adults with dia-
betes have other underlying chronic
conditions, substantial diabetes-related
comorbidity, limited cognitive or physical
functioning, or frailty (48,49). Other older
individuals with diabetes have little co-
morbidity and are active.
Life expectancies are highly variable
but are often longer than clinicians real-
ize. Multiple prognostic tools for life ex-
pectancy for older adults are available
(50,51). Notably, the Life Expectancy Es-
timator for Older Adults with Diabetes
(LEAD) tool was developed and vali-
dated among older adults with diabetes,
and a high risk score was strongly asso-
ciated with having a life expectancy of
<5 years (52). These data may be a use-
ful starting point to inform decisions
about selecting less stringent glycemic
goals (52,53). Older adults also vary in
their preferences for the intensity and
mode
of
glucose
management
(54).
Health care professionals caring for older
adults with diabetes must take this het-
erogeneity into consideration when set-
ting and prioritizing treatment goals (9,10)
(Table 13.1). In addition, older adults with
diabetes should be assessed for disease
treatment and self-management knowl-
edge, health literacy, and mathematical
literacy (numeracy) at the onset of treat-
ment. See Fig. 6.2 for individual/disease-
related factors to consider when determin-
ing individualized glycemic goals.
A1C may have limitations in those
who have medical conditions that im-
pact red blood cell turnover (see Sec-
tion 2, “Diagnosis and Classiﬁcation of
Diabetes,” for additional details on the
limitations of A1C) (55). Many condi-
tions associated with increased red blood
cell turnover, such as hemodialysis, recent
blood loss or transfusion, or erythropoie-
tin therapy, are commonly seen in older
adults and can falsely increase or decrease
A1C. In these instances, blood glucose
monitoring and/or CGM should be used
for goal setting (Table 13.1). Serum gly-
cated protein assays (fructosamine and
glycated albumin) may also be useful for
glycemic monitoring in conjunction with
other measures (see Section 6, “Glycemic
Goals and Hypoglycemia”) (56–60).
Older Adults With Good Functional
Status and Without Complications
There are few long-term studies in older
adults demonstrating the beneﬁts of
intensive glycemic, blood pressure, and
lipid management. Older adults who
can be expected to live long enough to
realize
the
beneﬁts
of
long-term
intensive diabetes management, who
have
good
cognitive
and
physical
function, and who choose to do so via
shared decision-making may be treated
using
therapeutic
interventions
and
goals similar to those for younger adults
with diabetes (Table 13.1).
As for all people with diabetes, diabe-
tes self-management education and on-
going diabetes self-management support
are vital components of diabetes care
for older adults and their caregivers.
Self-management knowledge and skills
should be reassessed when treatment
plan changes are made or an individual’s
functional abilities diminish. In addition,
declining or impaired ability to perform
diabetes self-care behaviors may be an
indication that an older person with dia-
betes needs a referral for cognitive and
physical functional assessment, using age-
normalized evaluation tools, as well as
help establishing a support structure for
diabetes care (3,28).
Older Adults With Complications and
Reduced Functionality
Older adults with diabetes categorized as
having complex or intermediate health
(Table 13.1) are heterogeneous with re-
spect to their function and life expectancy
(61–63). Based on concepts of competing
mortality and time to beneﬁt, some peo-
ple in this category with shorter life expec-
tancy will have less beneﬁt from glucose
lowering and should have less stringent
glycemic goals (64). This is especially true
for individuals with advanced diabetes
complications, life-limiting comorbid ill-
nesses, frailty, or substantial cognitive or
functional impairments. These individuals
are also more likely to suffer serious ad-
verse effects of therapeutics, such as
hypoglycemia (65). However, those with
poorly managed diabetes may be subject
to acute complications of diabetes, in-
cluding dehydration, poor wound healing,
and hyperglycemic hyperosmolar coma.
Glycemic goals should, at a minimum, avoid
these consequences. Factors to consider
for individualizing glycemic goals are out-
lined in Fig. 6.2. Clinicians should also con-
sider the balance of risks and beneﬁts of an
individual’s diabetes medications, including
disease-speciﬁc beneﬁts (such as reducing
symptomatic heart failure) and burdens
such as hypoglycemia risk, tolerability, difﬁ-
culties of administration, and ﬁnancial cost.
In addition, attention to oral health, foot
diabetesjournals.org/care
Older Adults
S247
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

care, fall prevention, and early detection of
depression will improve quality of life.
While Table 13.1 provides overall guid-
ance for identifying complex and very
complex patients, there is not yet global
consensus on geriatric patient classiﬁca-
tion. Ongoing empiric research on the
classiﬁcation of older adults with diabetes
based on comorbid illness has repeatedly
found three major classes of patients: a
healthy, a geriatric, and a cardiovascular
class (9,61,66). The geriatric class has the
highest prevalence of obesity, hyperten-
sion, arthritis, and incontinence, and the
cardiovascular class has the highest prev-
alence of myocardial infarctions, heart
failure, and stroke. Compared with the
healthy class, the cardiovascular class has
the highest risk of frailty and subsequent
mortality. Additional research is needed
to develop a reproducible classiﬁcation
scheme to distinguish the natural history
of disease as well as differential response
to glucose management and speciﬁc
glucose-lowering agents (67).
Vulnerable Older Adults at the End of
Life
For people with diabetes receiving pallia-
tive care and end-of-life care, the focus
should be to avoid hypoglycemia and
symptomatic hyperglycemia while reduc-
ing the burdens of glycemic management.
Thus, as organ failure develops, several
agents will have to be deintensiﬁed or dis-
continued. For a dying person, most agents
for type 2 diabetes may be removed (68).
There is, however, no consensus for the
management of type 1 diabetes in this
scenario (69). See the section END-OF-LIFE
CARE below for additional information.
Beyond Glycemic Management
Although minimizing hyperglycemia may
be important in older individuals with di-
abetes, greater reductions in morbidity
and mortality are likely to result from a
clinical focus on comprehensive cardio-
vascular risk factor modiﬁcation. There is
strong evidence from clinical trials of the
value of treating hypertension in older
adults (70,71), with treatment of hyper-
tension to individualized target levels in-
dicated in most. There is less evidence
for lipid-lowering therapy and aspirin
therapy, although the beneﬁts of these
interventions for primary and secondary
prevention are likely to apply to older
Table 13.1—Framework for considering treatment goals for glycemia, blood pressure, and dyslipidemia in older adults with
diabetes
Characteristics and
health status of person
with diabetes
Rationale
Reasonable A1C
goal*
Fasting or
preprandial
glucose
Bedtime glucose
Blood
pressure
Lipids
Healthy (few coexisting
chronic illnesses,
intact cognitive and
functional status)
Longer remaining life
expectancy
<7.0–7.5%
(<53–58
mmol/mol)
80–130 mg/dL
(4.4–7.2
mmol/L)
80–180 mg/dL
(4.4–10.0
mmol/L)
<130/80
mmHg
Statin, unless
contraindicated
or not tolerated
Complex/intermediate
(multiple coexisting
chronic illnesses† or
two or more
instrumental ADL
impairments or
mild to moderate
cognitive
impairment)
Variable life
expectancy.
Individualize goals,
considering:
 Severity of
comorbidities
 Cognitive and
functional limitations
 Frailty
 Risk-to-beneﬁt ratio
of diabetes
medications
 Individual preference
<8.0%
(<64 mmol/mol)
90–150 mg/dL
(5.0–8.3
mmol/L)
100–180 mg/dL
(5.6–10.0
mmol/L)
<130/80
mmHg
Statin, unless
contraindicated
or not tolerated
Very complex/poor
health (LTC or
end-stage chronic
illnesses‡ or
moderate to severe
cognitive impairment
or two or more ADL
impairments)
Limited remaining life
expectancy makes
beneﬁt minimal
Avoid reliance on
A1C; glucose
control decisions
should be based
on avoiding
hypoglycemia
and symptomatic
hyperglycemia
100–180 mg/dL
(5.6–10.0
mmol/L)
110–200 mg/dL
(6.1–11.1
mmol/L)
<140/90
mmHg
Consider likelihood
of beneﬁt with
statin
This table represents a consensus framework for considering treatment goals for glycemia, blood pressure, and dyslipidemia in older adults
with diabetes. The characteristic categories are general concepts. Not every individual will clearly fall into a particular category. Consideration
of individual and caregiver preferences is an important aspect of treatment individualization. Additionally, an individual’s health status and
preferences may change over time. ADL, activities of daily living; LTC, long-term care. *A lower A1C goal may be set for an individual if
achievable without recurrent or severe hypoglycemia or undue treatment burden. †Coexisting chronic illnesses are conditions serious enough
to require medications or lifestyle management and may include arthritis, cancer, heart failure, depression, emphysema, falls, hypertension,
incontinence, stage 3 or worse chronic kidney disease, myocardial infarction, and stroke. “Multiple” means at least three, but many individu-
als may have ﬁve or more (74). ‡The presence of a single end-stage chronic illness, such as stage 3–4 heart failure or oxygen-dependent lung
disease, chronic kidney disease requiring dialysis, or uncontrolled metastatic cancer, may cause signiﬁcant symptoms or impairment of func-
tional status and signiﬁcantly reduce life expectancy. Adapted from Kirkman et al. (3).
S248
Older Adults
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

adults whose life expectancies equal or
exceed the time frames of the clinical
trials (72). In the case of statins, the
follow-up time of clinical trials ranged
from 2 to 6 years. While the time frame
of trials can be used to inform treatment
decisions, a more speciﬁc concept is the
time to beneﬁt for a therapy. For statins,
a meta-analysis of the previously men-
tioned trials showed that the time to
beneﬁt is 2.5 years (73).
LIFESTYLE MANAGEMENT
Recommendations
13.12 Optimal nutrition and protein in-
take is recommended for older adults
with diabetes; regular exercise, includ-
ing aerobic activity, weight-bearing exer-
cise, and/or resistance training, should
be encouraged in all older adults with
diabetes who can safely engage in such
activities. B
13.13 For older adults with type 2 di-
abetes, overweight/obesity, and ca-
pacity to safely exercise, an intensive
lifestyle intervention focused on die-
tary changes, physical activity, and
modest weight loss (e.g., 5–7%) should
be considered for its beneﬁts on qual-
ity of life, mobility and physical func-
tioning, and cardiometabolic risk factor
control. A
Lifestyle management in older adults
should be tailored to frailty status. Dia-
betes in the aging population is associ-
ated with reduced muscle strength, poor
muscle quality, and accelerated loss of
muscle mass, which may result in sarco-
penia and/or osteopenia (74,75). Diabe-
tes is also recognized as an independent
risk factor for frailty. Frailty is character-
ized by decline in physical performance
and an increased risk of poor health out-
comes due to physiologic vulnerability
and functional or psychosocial stressors.
Inadequate nutritional intake, particularly
inadequate protein intake, can increase
the risk of sarcopenia and frailty in older
adults. Management of frailty in diabetes
includes optimal nutrition with adequate
protein intake combined with an exercise
program that includes aerobic, weight-
bearing, and resistance training. The ben-
eﬁts of a structured exercise program (as
in the Lifestyle Interventions and Inde-
pendence for Elders [LIFE] study) in frail
older adults include reducing sedentary
time, preventing mobility disability, and
reducing frailty (76,77). The goal of these
programs is not weight loss but en-
hanced functional status.
For nonfrail older adults with type 2
diabetes and overweight or obesity, an
intensive lifestyle intervention designed
to reduce weight is beneﬁcial across
multiple outcomes. The Look AHEAD
(Action for Health in Diabetes) trial is
described in Section 8, “Obesity and
Weight Management for the Prevention
and Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes.”
Look AHEAD speciﬁcally excluded indi-
viduals with a low functional status.
It enrolled people between 45 and
74 years of age and required that they
be able to perform a maximal exercise
test (78,79). While the Look AHEAD trial
did not achieve its primary outcome of
reducing cardiovascular events, the in-
tensive lifestyle intervention had multiple
clinical beneﬁts that are important to
the quality of life of older adults. Bene-
ﬁts included weight loss, improved physi-
cal ﬁtness, increased HDL cholesterol,
lowered systolic blood pressure, reduced
A1C levels, reduced waist circumference,
and reduced need for medications (80).
Additionally, several subgroups, including
participants who lost at least 10% of
baseline body weight at year 1, had im-
proved cardiovascular outcomes (81). Risk
factor management was improved with
reduced utilization of antihypertensive
medications, statins, and insulin (82). In
age-stratiﬁed analyses, older adults in the
trial (60 to early 70s) had similar beneﬁts
compared with younger people (83,84). In
addition, lifestyle intervention produced
beneﬁts on aging relevant outcomes such
as reductions in multimorbidity and im-
provements in physical function and
quality of life (85–88).
PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY
Recommendations
13.14 In older adults with type 2 di-
abetes, medications with low risk
of hypoglycemia are preferred, es-
pecially for those with hypoglyce-
mia risk factors. B
13.15 Overtreatment of diabetes is
common in older adults and should
be avoided. B
13.16a In older adults with diabetes,
deintensify hypoglycemia-causing med-
ications (e.g., insulin, sulfonylureas, or
meglitinides) or switch to a medication
class with low hypoglycemia risk for
individuals who are at high risk for hy-
poglycemia, using individualized glyce-
mic goals. B
13.16b In older adults with diabetes,
deintensify diabetes medications for
individuals for whom the harms and/or
burdens of treatment may be greater
than the beneﬁts, within individualized
glycemic goals. E
13.16c
Simpliﬁcation
of
complex
treatment plans (especially insulin)
is recommended to reduce the risk
of hypoglycemia and polypharmacy
and decrease the treatment burden
if it can be achieved using the indi-
vidualized glycemic goals. B
13.16d In older adults with type 2
diabetes and established or high risk
of atherosclerotic cardiovascular dis-
ease, heart failure, and/or chronic
kidney disease, the treatment plan
should include agents that reduce
cardiorenal risk, irrespective of glyce-
mia. A
13.17 Consider costs of care and cov-
erage when developing treatment
plans in order to reduce risk of cost-
related barriers to medication taking
and self-management behaviors. B
Special care is required in prescribing
and monitoring pharmacologic therapies
in older adults (89). See Fig. 9.3 for gen-
eral recommendations regarding glucose-
lowering treatment for adults with type 2
diabetes and Table 9.2 for person- and
drug-speciﬁc factors to consider when
selecting glucose-lowering agents. Cost
may be an especially important consider-
ation, as older adults tend to be on
many medications and live on ﬁxed
incomes (90). Accordingly, the costs of
care and insurance coverage rules should
be considered when developing treat-
ment plans to reduce the risk of cost-
related barriers to adherence (91,92).
See Table 9.3 and Table 9.4 for median
monthly cost in the U.S. of noninsulin
glucose-lowering agents and insulin, re-
spectively. It is important to match com-
plexity of the treatment plan to the
self-management ability of older adults
with diabetes and their available social
and medical support. Many older adults
with diabetes struggle to maintain the
frequent blood glucose monitoring and
insulin injection plans they previously
diabetesjournals.org/care
Older Adults
S249
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

followed, perhaps for many decades, as
they develop medical conditions that
may impair their ability to follow their
treatment plan safely. Individualized
glycemic goals should be established
(Fig. 6.2 and Table 13.1) and periodi-
cally adjusted based on coexisting chronic
illnesses, cognitive function, and functional
status (2). Intensive glycemic management
with medication plans including insulin
and sulfonylureas in older adults with com-
plex medical conditions has been identiﬁed
as overtreatment and found to be very
common in clinical practice (93–97). Ulti-
mately, the determination of whether a
person is considered overtreated requires
an elicitation of the person’s perceptions of
the current medication burden and prefer-
ences for treatments. For those seeking to
simplify their diabetes medication plan, de-
intensiﬁcation of plans in individuals taking
noninsulin glucose-lowering medications
can be achieved by either lowering the
dose or discontinuing some medications,
as long as the individualized glycemic
goals are maintained (98). When older
adults are found to have an insulin
plan with complexity beyond their self-
management abilities, lowering the dose
of insulin may not be adequate (99).
Simpliﬁcation of the insulin plan to match
an individual’s self-management abilities
and their available social and medical sup-
port in these situations has been shown
to reduce hypoglycemia and disease-
related distress without worsening glyce-
mic outcomes (100–103). Fig. 13.1 de-
picts an algorithm that can be used to
simplify the insulin plan (102). There are
now multiple studies evaluating deinten-
siﬁcation protocols in diabetes as well as
hypertension, demonstrating that dein-
tensiﬁcation is safe and possibly beneﬁ-
cial for older adults (98). Table 13.2
provides examples of and rationale for
situations where deintensiﬁcation and/or
insulin plan simpliﬁcation may be appropri-
ate in older adults.
Metformin
Metformin is the ﬁrst-line agent for older
adults with type 2 diabetes. Recent studies
have indicated that it may be used safely
in individuals with estimated glomerular ﬁl-
tration rate $30 mL/min/1.73 m2 (104).
However, it is contraindicated in those
with advanced renal insufﬁciency and
should be used with caution in those
with impaired hepatic function or heart
failure because of the increased risk of
lactic acidosis. Metformin may be tem-
porarily discontinued before procedures
including imaging studies using iodin-
ated contrast, during hospitalizations, and
when acute illness may compromise renal
or liver function. Additionally, metformin
Simpliﬁcation of Complex Insulin Therapy
Change timing from bedtime to morning
Individual on basal (long- or intermediate-acting)* and/or prandial (short- or rapid-acting)† insulins
Individual on premixed insulin‡
Use 70% of total dose as
basal only in the morning 
Prandial insulin
Basal insulin
Using individual and drug characteristics to guide decision-making, as depicted in
Fig. 9.3 and Table 9.2, select additional agent(s) as needed:
Every 2 weeks, adjust insulin dose and/or add glucose-lowering agents based on
 
finger-stick glucose testing performed before lunch and before dinner
Goal: 90–150 mg/dL (5.0–8.3 mmo/L) before meals; may change
 
goal based on overall health and goals of care||
If 50% of premeal finger-stick values over 2 weeks are above goal, increase the
 
dose or add another agent
If >2 premeal finger-stick values/week are <90 mg/dL (<5.0 mmol/L),
 
decrease the dose of medication
Titrate dose of basal insulin based on fasting
finger-stick glucose test results over a week
Fasting goal: 90–150 mg/dL (5.0–8.3 mmol/L)

May change goal based on overall health
 and goals of care**
If mealtime insulin 10 units/dose:
 Discontinue prandial insulin and add
 
noninsulin agent(s)§
Add noninsulin agents:
If eGFR is 45 mg/dL, start metformin 500 mg
 
daily and increase dose every 2 weeks, as
 
tolerated
If eGFR is <45 mg/dL, patient is already
 
taking metformin, or metformin is not tolerated,
 
proceed to second-line agent
If prandial insulin >10 units/dose:
 Decrease dose by 50% and add
       noninsulin agent
Titrate prandial insulin doses down as
noninsulin agent doses are increased
with the aim to discontinue prandial insulin
If 50% of the fasting finger-stick glucose
values are over the goal:
Increase dose by 2 units
If >2 fasting finger-stick values/week are <80
mg/dL (<4.4 mmol/L):
Decrease dose by 2 units
Additional Tips
 Do not use rapid- and short-acting insulin at bedtime
 While adjusting prandial insulin, a simpliﬁed
 
 
sliding scale may be used, for example:
 
 For premeal glucose >250 mg/dL (>13.9 mmol/L),
 
 
 
give 2 units of short- or rapid-acting insulin
 
 For premeal glucose >350 mg/dL (>19.4 mmol/L),
 
 
 
give 4 units of short- or rapid-acting insulin
 Stop sliding scale when not needed daily
Figure 13.1—Algorithm to simplify insulin plans for older adults with type 2 diabetes. eGFR, estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate. *Basal insulins: glargine
U-100 and U-300, detemir, degludec, and human NPH. †Prandial insulins: short-acting (regular human insulin) or rapid-acting (lispro, aspart, and gluli-
sine). ‡Premixed insulins: 70/30, 75/25, and 50/50 products. §Examples of noninsulin agents include metformin, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibi-
tors, dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors, and glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists. ||See Table 13.1. Adapted with permission from Munshi et al. (102).
S250
Older Adults
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Table 13.2—Considerations for treatment plan simpliﬁcation and deintensiﬁcation/deprescribing in older adults with
diabetes
Characteristics and
health status of person
with diabetes
Reasonable A1C/
treatment goal
Rationale/considerations
When may medication plan
simplification be required?
When may treatment
deintensification/
deprescribing be required?
Healthy (few coexisting
chronic illnesses,
intact cognitive and
functional status)
<7.0–7.5%
(<53–58 mmol/mol)
 Individuals can generally
perform complex tasks to
maintain good glycemic
management when health
is stable
 During acute illness,
individuals may be more at
risk for administration or
dosing errors that can
result in hypoglycemia,
falls, fractures, etc.
 If severe or recurrent
hypoglycemia occurs in
individuals on insulin therapy
(regardless of A1C)
 If wide glucose excursions
are observed
 If cognitive or functional
decline occurs following
acute illness
 If severe or recurrent
hypoglycemia occurs in
indviduals on noninsulin
therapies with high risk
of hypoglycemia
(regardless of A1C)
 If wide glucose
excursions are observed
 In the presence of
polypharmacy
Complex/intermediate
(multiple coexisting
chronic illnesses or
two or more
instrumental ADL
impairments or mild
to moderate cognitive
impairment)
<8.0%
(<64 mmol/mol)
 Comorbidities may affect
self-management abilities
and capacity to avoid
hypoglycemia
 Long-acting medication
formulations may decrease
pill burden and complexity
of medication plan
 If severe or recurrent
hypoglycemia occurs in
individuals on insulin therapy
(even if A1C is appropriate)
 If unable to manage
complexity of an insulin plan
 If there is a signiﬁcant
change in social
circumstances, such as loss of
caregiver, change in living
situation, or ﬁnancial
difﬁculties
 If severe or recurrent
hypoglycemia occurs in
individuals on noninsulin
therapies with high risk
of hypoglycemia (even if
A1C is appropriate)
 If wide glucose
excursions are observed
 In the presence of
polypharmacy
Community-dwelling
individuals receiving
care in a skilled
nursing facility for
short-term
rehabilitation
Avoid reliance on
A1C, glucose goal
100–200 mg/dL
(5.55–11.1 mmol/L)
 Glycemic management is
important for recovery,
wound healing, hydration,
and avoidance of infections
 Individuals recovering from
illness may not have
returned to baseline
cognitive function at the
time of discharge
 Consider the type of
support the individual will
receive at home
 If treatment plan increased
in complexity during
hospitalization, it is
reasonable, in many cases, to
reinstate the
prehospitalization medication
plan during the rehabilitation
 If the hospitalization for
acute illness resulted in
weight loss, anorexia,
short-term cognitive
decline, and/or loss of
physical functioning
Very complex/poor
health (LTC or end-
stage chronic illnesses
or moderate to
severe cognitive
impairment or two or
more ADL
impairments)
Avoid reliance on A1C
and avoid
hypoglycemia and
symptomatic
hyperglycemia
 No beneﬁts of tight
glycemic management in
this population
 Hypoglycemia should be
avoided
 Most important outcomes
are maintenance of
cognitive and functional
status
 If on an insulin plan and the
individual would like to
decrease the number of
injections and ﬁnger-stick
blood glucose monitoring
events each day
 If the individual has an
inconsistent eating pattern
 If on noninsulin agents
with a high
hypoglycemia risk in the
context of cognitive
dysfunction, depression,
anorexia, or inconsistent
eating pattern
 If taking any
medications without
clear beneﬁts
At the end of life
Avoid hypoglycemia
and symptomatic
hyperglycemia
 Goal is to provide comfort
and avoid tasks or
interventions that cause
pain or discomfort
 Caregivers are important in
providing medical care and
maintaining quality of life
 If there is pain or discomfort
caused by treatment (e.g.,
injections or ﬁnger sticks)
 If there is excessive caregiver
stress due to treatment
complexity
 If taking any
medications without
clear beneﬁts in
improving symptoms
and/or comfort
Treatment plan simpliﬁcation refers to changing strategy to decrease the complexity of a medication plan (e.g., fewer administration times
and fewer blood glucose checks) and decreasing the need for calculations (such as sliding-scale insulin calculations or insulin-carbohydrate ra-
tio calculations). Deintensiﬁcation/deprescribing refers to decreasing the dose or frequency of administration of a treatment or discontinuing
a treatment altogether. Created using information from Munshi et al. 2016 (102) and 2017 (138). ADL, activities of daily living; LTC, long-term
care.
diabetesjournals.org/care
Older Adults
S251
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

can cause gastrointestinal side effects and
a reduction in appetite that can be prob-
lematic for some older adults. Reduction
or elimination of metformin may be nec-
essary for those experiencing persistent
gastrointestinal side effects. For those
taking metformin long-term, monitoring
for vitamin B12 deﬁciency should be
considered (105).
Thiazolidinediones
Thiazolidinediones, if used at all, should
be used very cautiously in older adults on
insulin therapy as well as in those with
or at risk for heart failure, osteoporosis,
falls or fractures, and/or macular edema
(106,107). Lower doses of a thiazolidine-
dione in combination therapy may miti-
gate these side effects.
Insulin Secretagogues
Sulfonylureas and other insulin secreta-
gogues such as the meglitinides (repagli-
nide and nateglinide) are associated with
hypoglycemia and should be used with
caution. If used, sulfonylureas with a shorter
duration of action, such as glipizide, are pre-
ferred. Glyburide is a longer-acting sulfonyl-
urea and should be avoided in older adults
(108).
Incretin-Based Therapies
Oral dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibi-
tors have few side effects and minimal
risk of hypoglycemia, but their cost may
be a barrier to some older adults. DPP-4
inhibitors do not reduce or increase major
adverse cardiovascular outcomes (109).
Across the trials of this drug class, there
appears to be no interaction by age-group
(110–112). A challenge of interpreting the
age-stratiﬁed analyses of this drug class
and other cardiovascular outcomes trials
is that while most of these analyses were
prespeciﬁed, they were not powered to
detect differences.
GLP-1 receptor agonists have demon-
strated cardiovascular beneﬁts among
people with diabetes and established ath-
erosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD)
and those at higher ASCVD risk, and newer
trials are expanding our understanding
of their beneﬁts in other populations
(109). See Section 9, “Pharmacologic
Approaches to Glycemic Treatment,” and
Section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and
Risk Management,” for a more extensive
discussion regarding the speciﬁc indica-
tions for this class of agents. In a
systematic review and meta-analysis of
GLP-1 receptor agonist trials, these agents
have been found to reduce major adverse
cardiovascular
events,
cardiovascular
deaths, stroke, and myocardial infarction
to the same degree for people over and
under 65 years of age (113).While the ev-
idence for this class of agents for older
adults continues to grow, there are a
number of practical issues that should be
considered speciﬁcally for older people.
These drugs are injectable agents (with
the exception of oral semaglutide) (114),
which require visual, motor, and cognitive
skills
for
appropriate
administration.
Agents with a weekly dosing schedule
may however reduce the burden of ad-
ministration. GLP-1 receptor agonists may
also be associated with nausea, vomiting,
and diarrhea. Given the gastrointestinal
side effects of this class, GLP-1 receptor ag-
onists may not be preferred in older adults
who are experiencing unexplained weight
loss or have suspected gastroparesis or re-
current gastrointestinal problems.
Recently, tirzepatide, a novel dual-
acting GIP and GLP-1 receptor coagonist,
was approved by the FDA for the treat-
ment of type 2 diabetes. Tirzepatide is ad-
ministered as a once-weekly subcutaneous
injection. In phase 3 trials, tirzepatide de-
creased A1C and weight—generally to a
greater extent than other glucose-lowering
drugs including semaglutide and insulin—
with no signiﬁcant differences in the safety
or efﬁcacy in older compared with younger
individuals (115).
Sodium–Glucose Cotransporter 2
Inhibitors
SGLT2 inhibitors are administered orally,
which may be convenient for older adults
with diabetes. In those with established
ASCVD, these agents have shown car-
diovascular beneﬁts (109). This class of
agents has also been found to be beneﬁ-
cial for people with heart failure and to
slow the progression of chronic kidney
disease. See Section 9, “Pharmacologic
Approaches to Glycemic Treatment,” and
Section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and
Risk Management,” for a more extensive
discussion regarding the indications for
this class of agents. Stratiﬁed analyses of
the trials of this drug class indicate that
older adults have similar or greater bene-
ﬁts than younger people (116–118). While
understanding of the clinical beneﬁts of
this class is evolving, side effects such as
volume depletion, urinary tract infections,
and worsening urinary incontinence may
be more common among older people,
and these drugs should be used with
caution in individuals who depend on
caregivers for adequate ﬂuid intake
or who have recurrent urinary tract
infections.
Insulin Therapy
The use of insulin therapy requires that in-
dividuals or their caregivers have good vi-
sual and motor skills and cognitive ability.
Insulin therapy relies on the ability of the
older person with diabetes to administer in-
sulin on their own or with the assistance of
a caregiver. Insulin doses should be titrated
to meet individualized glycemic goals and
to avoid hypoglycemia.
Once-daily basal insulin injection ther-
apy is associated with minimal side ef-
fects and may be a reasonable option in
many older adults (119). When choosing
a basal insulin, long-acting insulin analogs
have been found to be associated with
a lower risk of hypoglycemia compared
with NPH insulin in the Medicare popula-
tion. Multiple daily injections of insulin
may be too complex for an older person
with advanced diabetes complications,
life-limiting coexisting chronic illnesses, or
limited functional status. Fig. 13.1 pro-
vides a potential approach to insulin plan
simpliﬁcation.
Other Factors to Consider
The needs of older adults with diabetes
and their caregivers should be evaluated
to construct a tailored care plan. Impaired
social support and reduced access to
long-term services and support may re-
duce these individuals’ quality of life and
increase the risk of functional depen-
dency (7). The person’s living situation
must be considered as it may affect dia-
betes management and support needs.
Social and instrumental support networks
(e.g., adult children and caretakers) that
provide instrumental or emotional sup-
port for older adults with diabetes should
be included in diabetes management dis-
cussions and shared decision-making.
The need for ongoing support of older
adults becomes even greater when tran-
sitions to acute care and long-term care
(LTC) become necessary. Unfortunately,
these transitions can lead to discontinuity
in goals of care, errors in dosing, and
changes in nutrition and activity (120).
Older adults in assisted living facilities
S252
Older Adults
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

may not have support to administer their
own medications, whereas those living in
a nursing home (community living cen-
ters) may rely on ﬁrst-line caregivers in-
cluding nursing and care professionals
with variable clinical expertise. Those re-
ceiving palliative care (with or without
hospice) may require an approach that
emphasizes comfort and symptom man-
agement while deemphasizing strict met-
abolic and blood pressure management.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR
OLDER ADULTS WITH TYPE 1
DIABETES
Due in part to the success of modern dia-
betes management, people with type 1
diabetes are living longer, and the popula-
tion of these people over 65 years of age
is growing (121–123). Many of the recom-
mendations in this section regarding a
comprehensive geriatric assessment and
personalization of goals and treatments
are directly applicable to older adults
with type 1 diabetes; however, this popu-
lation has unique challenges and requires
distinct treatment considerations (124).
Insulin is an essential life-preserving ther-
apy for people with type 1 diabetes, un-
like for those with type 2 diabetes. To
avoid diabetic ketoacidosis, older adults
with type 1 diabetes need some form of
basal insulin even when they are unable
to ingest meals. Insulin may be delivered
through an insulin pump or injections.
CGM is approved for use by Medicare
and can play a critical role in improving
A1C, reducing glycemic variability, and
reducing risk of hypoglycemia (43) (see
Section 7, “Diabetes Technology,” and
Section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches to
Glycemic Treatment”). In older people with
type 1 diabetes, administration of insulin
may become more difﬁcult as complica-
tions, cognitive impairment, and functional
impairment arise.This increases the impor-
tance of caregivers in the lives of these in-
dividuals. Many older people with type 1
diabetes require placement in LTC settings
(i.e., nursing homes and skilled nursing fa-
cilities), and unfortunately staff in these
settings are less familiar with CGM devices,
insulin pumps, or advanced insulin delivery
devices. Some staff may be less knowl-
edgeable about the differences between
type 1 and type 2 diabetes. In these instan-
ces, the individual or the person’s family
may be more familiar with their diabetes
management plan than the staff or health
care professionals. Education of relevant
support staff and health care professionals
in rehabilitation and LTC settings regarding
insulin dosing and use of pumps and CGM
is recommended as part of general diabetes
education (see Recommendations 13.18
and 13.19).
TREATMENT IN SKILLED NURSING
FACILITIES AND NURSING HOMES
Recommendations
13.18 Consider diabetes education/
training (including that for CGM devi-
ces, insulin pumps, and advanced in-
sulin delivery systems) for the staff of
long-term care and rehabilitation fa-
cilities to improve the management
of older adults with diabetes. E
13.19 People with diabetes residing in
long-term care facilities need careful
assessment to establish individualized
glycemic goals and to make appropri-
ate choices of glucose-lowering agents
and devices (including CGM devices,
insulin pumps, and advanced insulin
delivery systems) based on their clini-
cal and functional status. E
Management of diabetes in the LTC set-
ting is unique. Individualization of health
care is important for all people with
diabetes; however, practical guidance
is needed for health care professionals
as well as the LTC staff and caregivers
(125). Training should include diabetes
detection and institutional quality assess-
ment. LTC facilities should develop their
own policies and procedures for preven-
tion, recognition, and management of hy-
poglycemia. With the increased longevity
of populations, the care of people with
diabetes and its complications in LTC is
an area that warrants greater study.
Resources
Staff of LTC facilities should receive ap-
propriate diabetes education to improve
the management of older adults with dia-
betes. Treatments for each person with
diabetes should be individualized. Special
management considerations include the
need to avoid both hypoglycemia and the
complications of hyperglycemia (2,126).
For more information, see the ADA posi-
tion statement “Management of Diabetes
in Long-term Care and Skilled Nursing Fa-
cilities” (125).
Nutritional Considerations
An older adult residing in an LTC facility
may have irregular and unpredictable meal
consumption, undernutrition, anorexia,
and impaired swallowing. Furthermore,
therapeutic diets may inadvertently lead
to decreased food intake and contribute
to unintentional weight loss and under-
nutrition. Meals tailored to a person’s
culture, preferences, and personal goals
may increase quality of life, satisfaction
with meals, and nutrition status (127). It
may be helpful to give insulin after meals
to ensure that the dose is appropriate
for the amount of carbohydrate the indi-
vidual consumed in the meal.
Hypoglycemia
Older adults with diabetes in LTC are es-
pecially vulnerable to hypoglycemia. They
have a disproportionately high number of
clinical complications and comorbidities
that can increase hypoglycemia risk: im-
paired cognitive and renal function, slowed
hormonal regulation and counterregula-
tion, suboptimal hydration, variable appe-
tite and nutritional intake, polypharmacy,
and slowed intestinal absorption (128).
Oral agents may achieve glycemic out-
comes similar to basal insulin in LTC pop-
ulations (93,129). CGM may be a useful
approach to monitoring for hypoglycemia
among individuals treated with insulin in
LTC, but the data are limited.
Another consideration for the LTC set-
ting is that unlike in the hospital setting,
health care professionals are not required
to evaluate patients daily. According to fe-
deral guidelines, assessments should be
done at least every 30 days for the ﬁrst
90 days after admission and then at least
once every 60 days. Although in practice
patients may actually be seen more fre-
quently, the concern is that these individ-
uals may have uncontrolled glucose levels
or wide excursions without the practi-
tioner being notiﬁed. Health care profes-
sionals may adjust treatment plans by
telephone, fax, or in person directly at the
LTC facilities, provided they are given timely
notiﬁcation of blood glucose management
issues from a standardized alert system.
The following alert strategy could be
considered:
1. Call health care professional immedi-
ately in cases of low blood glucose
levels (<70 mg/dL [<3.9 mmol/L]).
However, treatment of hypoglycemia
should not be delayed. A health care
diabetesjournals.org/care
Older Adults
S253
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

professional should also be called if
two or more blood glucose values
>250 mg/dL are observed within a
24-h period and are accompanied by
a signiﬁcant change in status.
2. Call as soon as possible when
a) glucose values are 70–100 mg/dL
(3.9–5.6 mmol/L) (treatment plan
may need to be adjusted),
b) glucose values are consistently
>250 mg/dL (>13.9 mmol/L)
within a 24-h period,
c) glucose values are consistently
>300 mg/dL (>16.7 mmol/L)
over 2 consecutive days,
d) any reading is too high for the
glucose monitoring device, or
e) the person is sick, with vomiting,
symptomatic hyperglycemia, or
poor oral intake.
END-OF-LIFE CARE
Recommendations
13.20 When palliative care is needed
in older adults with diabetes, health
care professionals should initiate con-
versations with people with diabetes
and their care partners regarding the
goals and intensity of care. Strict glu-
cose and blood pressure management
are not necessary, and simpliﬁcation
of medication plans can be consid-
ered. Similarly, the intensity of lipid
management can be relaxed, and
withdrawal of lipid-lowering therapy
may be appropriate. E
13.21 Overall comfort, prevention
of distressing symptoms, and pres-
ervation of quality of life and dig-
nity are primary goals for diabetes
management at the end of life. C
The management of the older adult at
the end of life receiving palliative medi-
cine or hospice care is a unique situation.
Overall, palliative medicine promotes
comfort, symptom management and
prevention (pain, hypoglycemia, hypergly-
cemia, and dehydration), and preserva-
tion of dignity and quality of life in older
adults
with
limited
life
expectancy
(126,130). In the setting of palliative care,
health care professionals should initiate
conversations with people with diabetes
and their care partners regarding the
goals and intensity of diabetes care; strict
glucose and blood pressure management
may not be consistent with achieving
comfort and quality of life. Avoidance of
severe hypertension and hyperglycemia
aligns with the goals of palliative care. In
a multicenter trial, withdrawal of statins
among people with diabetes in palliative
care was found to improve quality of life
(131–133). The evidence for the safety
and efﬁcacy of deintensiﬁcation proto-
cols in older adults is growing for both
glucose and blood pressure management
(97,134) and is clearly relevant for pallia-
tive care. An individual has the right to
refuse testing and treatment, whereas
health care professionals may consider
withdrawing treatment and limiting diag-
nostic testing, including a reduction in
the frequency of blood glucose monitor-
ing (135,136). Glycemic goals should aim
to prevent hypoglycemia and hyperglyce-
mia. Treatment interventions need to be
mindful of quality of life. Careful monitor-
ing of oral intake is warranted. The deci-
sion process may need to involve the
individual, family, and caregivers, leading
to a care plan that is both convenient
and effective for the goals of care (137).
The pharmacologic therapy may include
oral agents as ﬁrst line, followed by a sim-
pliﬁed insulin plan. If needed, basal insulin
can be implemented, accompanied by oral
agents and without rapid-acting insulin.
Agents that can cause gastrointestinal
symptoms such as nausea orexcess weight
loss may not be good choices in this set-
ting. As symptoms progress, some agents
may be slowly tapered and discontinued.
Different categories have been pro-
posed for diabetes management in those
with advanced disease (68).
1. A stable individual: Continue with
the person’s previous medication
plan, with a focus on 1) the preven-
tion of hypoglycemia and 2) the
management of hyperglycemia us-
ing blood glucose testing, keeping
levels below the renal threshold of
glucose, and hyperglycemia-mediated
dehydration. There is no role for A1C
monitoring.
2. An individual with organ failure: Prevent-
ing hypoglycemia is of greatest signiﬁ-
cance. Dehydration must be prevented
and treated. In people with type 1 dia-
betes, insulin administration may be
reduced as the oral intake of food de-
creases but should not be stopped. For
those with type 2 diabetes, agents that
may cause hypoglycemia should be
reduced in dose. The main goal is to
avoid hypoglycemia, allowing for glucose
values in the upper level of the desired
goal range.
3. A dying individual: For people with
type 2 diabetes, the discontinuation of
all medications may be a reasonable ap-
proach, as these individuals are unlikely
to have any oral intake. In people with
type 1 diabetes, there is no consensus,
but a small amount of basal insulin may
maintain glucose levels and prevent
acute hyperglycemic complications.
References
1. Laiteerapong N, Huang ES. Diabetes in older
adults. In Diabetes in America. 3rd ed. Cowie CC,
Casagrande SS, Menke A, et al., Eds. Bethesda,
MD, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases (US), 2018. Accessed 13
October 2023. Available from https://www.
niddk.nih.gov/about-niddk/strategic-plans-
reports/diabetes-in-america-3rd-edition
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
National
Diabetes
Statistics
Report,
2020:
Estimates of Diabetes and its Burden in the
United States. 2020. Accessed 13 October 2023.
Available from https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/
pdfs/data/statistics/national-diabetes-statistics-
report.pdf
3. Kirkman MS, Briscoe VJ, Clark N, et al.
Diabetes in older adults. Diabetes Care 2012;35:
2650–2664
4. Young-Hyman D, de Groot M, Hill-Briggs F,
Gonzalez JS, Hood K, Peyrot M. Psychosocial care
for people with diabetes: a position statement of
the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care
2016;39:2126–2140
5. Institute of Medicine of the National Academies.
Cognitive aging: progress in understanding and
opportunities for action. Accessed 13 October 2023.
Available from https://nationalacademies.org/hmd/
Reports/2015/Cognitive-Aging.aspx
6. Sudore RL, Karter AJ, Huang ES, et al.
Symptom burden of adults with type 2 diabetes
across the disease course: diabetes & aging study.
J Gen Intern Med 2012;27:1674–1681
7. Laiteerapong N, Karter AJ, Liu JY, et al.
Correlates of quality of life in older adults with
diabetes: the diabetes & aging study. Diabetes
Care 2011;34:1749–1753
8. McClintock MK, Dale W, Laumann EO, Waite
L. Empirical redeﬁnition of comprehensive health
and well-being in the older adults of the United
States. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2016;113:E3071–
E3080
9. Laiteerapong N, Iveniuk J, John PM, Laumann
EO, Huang ES. Classiﬁcation of older adults who
have diabetes by comorbid conditions, United
States, 2005-2006. Prev Chronic Dis 2012;9:E100
10. Blaum C, Cigolle CT, Boyd C, et al. Clinical
complexity in middle-aged and older adults with
diabetes: the Health and Retirement Study. Med
Care 2010;48:327–334
11. Tinetti ME, Costello DM, Naik AD, et al.
Outcome Goals and health care preferences
of older adults with multiple chronic conditions.
JAMA Netw Open 2021;4:e211271
S254
Older Adults
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

12. Cukierman T, Gerstein HC, Williamson JD.
Cognitive decline and dementia in diabetes–
systematic overview of prospective observational
studies. Diabetologia 2005;48:2460–2469
13. Roberts RO, Knopman DS, Przybelski SA,
et al. Association of type 2 diabetes with brain
atrophy and cognitive impairment. Neurology
2014;82:1132–1141
14. Xu WL, von Strauss E, Qiu CX, Winblad B,
Fratiglioni L. Uncontrolled diabetes increases the
risk of Alzheimer’s disease: a population-based
cohort study. Diabetologia 2009;52:1031–1039
15. Yaffe K, Falvey C, Hamilton N, et al. Diabetes,
glucose control, and 9-year cognitive decline
among older adults without dementia. Arch Neurol
2012;69:1170–1175
16. Rawlings AM, Sharrett AR, Schneider AL,
et al. Diabetes in midlife and cognitive change
over 20 years: a cohort study. Ann Intern Med
2014;161:785–793
17. Livingston G, Huntley J, Sommerlad A, et al.
Dementia prevention, intervention, and care:
2020 report of the Lancet Commission. Lancet
2020;396:413–446
18. Launer LJ, Miller ME, Williamson JD, et al.;
ACCORD MIND investigators. Effects of intensive
glucose lowering on brain structure and function
in people with type 2 diabetes (ACCORD MIND):
a randomized open-label substudy. Lancet Neurol
2011;10:969–977
19. Luchsinger JA, Ma Y, Christophi CA, et al.;
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.
Metformin, lifestyle intervention, and cognition
in the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes
Study. Diabetes Care 2017;40:958–965
20. Lingvay I, Cheng AY, Levine JA, et al.
Achievement of glycaemic targets with weight loss
and without hypoglycaemia in type 2 diabetes with
the once-weekly glucose-dependent insulinotropic
polypeptide and glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor
agonist tirzepatide: a post hoc analysis of the
SURPASS-1 to -5 studies. Diabetes Obes Metab
2023;25:965–974
21. Leisher S, Bohorquez A, Gay M, et al.
Amyloid-lowering monoclonal antibodies for the
treatment of early Alzheimer’s disease. CNS
Drugs 2023;37:671–677
22. National Institute on Aging. Assessing
cognitive impairment in older patients. Accessed
13 October 2023. Available from https://www.nia.
nih.gov/health/assessing-cognitive-impairment-
older-patients
23. Alzheimer’s Association. Cognitive assessment.
Accessed 13 October 2023. Available from https://
alz.org/professionals/healthcare-professionals/
cognitive-assessment
24. Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. “Mini-
mental state”. A practical method for grading
the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. J
Psychiatr Res 1975;12:189–198
25. Borson S, Scanlan JM, Chen P, Ganguli M.
The Mini-Cog as a screen for dementia: validation
in a population-based sample. J Am Geriatr Soc
2003;51:1451–1454
26. Nasreddine ZS, Phillips NA, Bedirian V, et al.
The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief
screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. J Am
Geriatr Soc 2005;53:695–699
27. Moreno
G,
Mangione
CM,
Kimbro
L;
American Geriatrics Society Expert Panel on Care
of Older Adults with Diabetes Mellitus. Guidelines
abstracted from the American Geriatrics Society
Guidelines for Improving the Care of Older Adults
with Diabetes Mellitus: 2013 update. J Am Geriatr
Soc 2013;61:2020–2026
28. APA Task Force on the Evaluation of Dementia
and Age-Related Cognitive Change. APA guidelines
for the evaluation of dementia and age-related
cognitive change, 2021. Accessed 13 October 2023.
Available from https://www.apa.org/practice/
guidelines/dementia.aspx
29. Lee AK, Lee CJ, Huang ES, Sharrett AR,
Coresh J, Selvin E. Risk factors for severe
hypoglycemia in black and white adults with
diabetes: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities
(ARIC) study. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1661–1667
30. Feinkohl I, Aung PP, Keller M, et al.; Edinburgh
Type 2 Diabetes Study (ET2DS) Investigators.
Severe hypoglycemia and cognitive decline in older
people with type 2 diabetes: the Edinburgh Type 2
Diabetes Study. Diabetes Care 2014;37:507–515
31. Lee AK, Rawlings AM, Lee CJ, et al. Severe
hypoglycaemia, mild cognitive impairment,
dementia and brain volumes in older adults
with type 2 diabetes: the Atherosclerosis Risk in
Communities (ARIC) cohort study. Diabetologia
2018;61:1956–1965
32. Jacobson AM, Ryan CM, Braffett BH, et al.;
DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Cognitive performance
declines in older adults with type 1 diabetes:
results from 32 years of follow-up in the DCCT and
EDIC Study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2021;
9:436–445
33. Fitzgerald JT, Davis WK, Connell CM, Hess
GE, Funnell MM, Hiss RG. Development and
validation of the Diabetes Care Proﬁle. Eval
Health Prof 1996;19:208–230
34. Karter AJ, Warton EM, Lipska KJ, et al.
Development and validation of a tool to identify
patients with type 2 diabetes at high risk of
hypoglycemia-related emergency department or
hospital use. JAMA Intern Med 2017;177:1461–
1470
35. Gerstein HC, Miller ME, Byington RP, et al.;
Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes
Study Group. Effects of intensive glucose lowering
in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;358:2545–
2559
36. Duckworth W, Abraira C, Moritz T, et al.;
VADT Investigators. Glucose control and vascular
complications in veterans with type 2 diabetes. N
Engl J Med 2009;360:129–139
37. Toschi E, Slyne C, Sifre K, et al. The
relationship between CGM-derived metrics, A1C,
and risk of hypoglycemia in older adults with type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2020;43:2349–2354
38. Carlson AL, Kanapka LG, Miller KM, et al.;
WISDM Study Group. Hypoglycemia and glycemic
control in older adults with type 1 diabetes:
baseline results from the WISDM study. J Dia-
betes Sci Technol 2021;15:582–592
39. Pratley RE, Kanapka LG, Rickels MR, et al.;
Wireless Innovation for Seniors With Diabetes
Mellitus (WISDM) Study Group. Effect of continuous
glucose monitoring on hypoglycemia in older
adults with type 1 diabetes: a randomized clinical
trial. JAMA 2020;323:2397–2406
40. Miller KM, Kanapka LG, Rickels MR, et al.
Beneﬁt of continuous glucose monitoring in
reducing hypoglycemia is sustained through
12 months of use among older adults with type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:424–
434
41. Gubitosi-Klug RA, Braffett BH, Bebu I, et al.
Continuous glucose monitoring in adults with
type 1 diabetes with 35 years duration from the
DCCT/EDIC study. Diabetes Care 2022;45:659–
665
42. Karter AJ, Parker MM, Moffet HH, Gilliam LK,
Dlott R. Association of real-time continuous
glucose monitoring with glycemic control and
acute metabolic events among patients with
insulin-treated diabetes. JAMA 2021;325:2273–
2284
43. Ruedy KJ, Parkin CG, Riddlesworth TD;
DIAMOND Study Group. Continuous glucose
monitoring in older adults with type 1 and type 2
diabetes using multiple daily injections of insulin:
results from the DIAMOND trial. J Diabetes Sci
Technol 2017;11:1138–1146
44. McAuley SA,Trawley S,Vogrin S, et al. Closed-
loop insulin delivery versus sensor-augmented
pump therapy in older adults with type 1 diabetes
(ORACL): a randomized, crossover trial. Diabetes
Care 2022;45:381–390
45. Boughton CK, Hartnell S, Thabit H, et al.
Hybrid closed-loop glucose control compared with
sensor augmented pump therapy in older adults
with type 1 diabetes: an open-label multicentre,
multinational, randomized, crossover study. Lancet
Healthy Longev 2022;3:e135–e142
46. Forlenza GP, Carlson AL, Galindo RJ, et al.
Real-world evidence supporting Tandem Control-
IQ hybrid closed-loop success in the medicare and
medicaid type 1 and type 2 diabetes populations.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:814–823
47. Selvin E, Coresh J, Brancati FL. The burden
and treatment of diabetes in elderly individuals
in the U.S. Diabetes Care 2006;29:2415–2419
48. Bandeen-Roche K, Seplaki CL, Huang J, et al.
Frailty in older adults: a nationally representative
proﬁle in the United States. J Gerontol A Biol Sci
Med Sci 2015;70:1427–1434
49. Kalyani RR, Tian J, Xue QL, et al. Hyperglycemia
and incidence of frailty and lower extremity mobility
limitations in older women. J Am Geriatr Soc 2012;
60:1701–1707
50. Pilla SJ, Schoenborn NL, Maruthur NM,
Huang ES. Approaches to risk assessment among
older patients with diabetes. Curr Diab Rep
2019;19:59
51. Grifﬁth KN, Prentice JC, Mohr DC, Conlin PR.
Predicting 5- and 10-year mortality risk in older
adults with diabetes. Diabetes Care 2020;43:
1724–1731
52. Karter AJ, Parker MM, Moffet HH, et al.
Development and validation of the Life Expectancy
Estimator for Older Adults with Diabetes (LEAD):
the diabetes and aging study. J Gen Intern Med
2023;38:2860–2869
53. Deardorff WJ, Covinsky K. Incorporating
prognosis into clinical decision-making for older
adults with diabetes. J Gen Intern Med 2023;
38:2857–2859
54. Brown SE, Meltzer DO, Chin MH, Huang ES.
Perceptions of quality-of-life effects of treatments for
diabetes mellitus in vulnerable and nonvulnerable
older patients. J Am Geriatr Soc 2008;56:1183–1190
55. National Glycohemoglobin Standardization
Program. Factors that interfere with HbA1c test
results. Accessed 13 October 2023. Available
from https://ngsp.org/factors.asp
56. Parrinello CM, Selvin E. Beyond HbA1c and
glucose: the role of nontraditional glycemic
diabetesjournals.org/care
Older Adults
S255
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

markers in diabetes diagnosis, prognosis, and
management. Curr Diab Rep 2014;14:548
57. Selvin E, Rawlings AM, Grams M, et al.
Fructosamine and glycated albumin for risk
stratiﬁcation and prediction of incident diabetes
and microvascular complications: a prospective
cohort analysis of the Atherosclerosis Risk in
Communities (ARIC) study. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol 2014;2:279–288
58. Nathan DM, McGee P, Steffes MW, Lachin
JM; DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Relationship of
glycated albumin to blood glucose and HbA1c
values and to retinopathy, nephropathy, and
cardiovascular outcomes in the DCCT/EDIC study.
Diabetes 2014;63:282–290
59. Selvin E, Rawlings AM, Lutsey PL, et al.
Fructosamine and glycated albumin and the risk of
cardiovascular outcomes and death. Circulation
2015;132:269–277
60. Rooney MR, Daya N, Tang O, et al. Glycated
albumin and risk of mortality in the US adult
population. Clin Chem 2022;68:422–430
61. Leung V,Wroblewski K, Schumm LP, Huisingh-
Scheetz M, Huang ES. Reexamining the classiﬁcation
of older adults with diabetes by comorbidities and
exploring relationships with frailty, disability, and
5-year mortality. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci
2021;76:2071–2079
62. Cigolle CT, Kabeto MU, Lee PG, Blaum CS.
Clinical complexity and mortality in middle-aged
and older adults with diabetes. J Gerontol A Biol
Sci Med Sci 2012;67:1313–1320
63. Le P, Ayers G, Misra-Hebert AD, et al.
Adherence to the American Diabetes Association’s
glycemic goals in the treatment of diabetes among
older americans, 2001-2018. Diabetes Care 2022;
45:1107–1115
64. Huang ES, Zhang Q, Gandra N, Chin MH,
Meltzer DO. The effect of comorbid illness and
functional status on the expected beneﬁts of
intensive glucose control in older patients with
type 2 diabetes: a decision analysis. Ann Intern
Med 2008;149:11–19
65. Huang ES, Laiteerapong N, Liu JY, John PM,
Moffet HH, Karter AJ. Rates of complications and
mortality in older patients with diabetes mellitus:
the diabetes and aging study. JAMA Intern Med
2014;174:251–258
66. Huang ES, Liu JY, Lipska KJ, et al. Data-driven
classiﬁcation of health status of older adults with
diabetes: the diabetes and aging study. J Am
Geriatr Soc 2023;71:2120–2130
67. Rooney MR, Tang O, Echouffo Tcheugui JB,
et al. American Diabetes Association framework
for glycemic control in older adults: implications
for risk of hospitalization and mortality. Diabetes
Care 2021;44:1524–1531
68. Sinclair A, Dunning T, Colagiuri S. International
Diabetes Federation (IDF) Global Guideline for
Managing Older People with Type 2 Diabetes.
International Diabetes Federation, 2013
69. Angelo M, Ruchalski C, Sproge BJ. An
approach to diabetes mellitus in hospice and
palliative medicine. J Palliat Med 2011;14:83–87
70. Beckett NS, Peters R, Fletcher AE, et al.;
HYVET Study Group. Treatment of hypertension
in patients 80 years of age or older. N Engl J Med
2008;358:1887–1898
71. De Boer IH, Bangalore S, Benetos A, et al.
Diabetes and hypertension: a position statement
by the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes
Care 2017;40:1273–1284
72. Gencer B, Marston NA, Im K, et al. Efﬁcacy
and safety of lowering LDL cholesterol in older
patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. Lancet 2020;
396:1637–1643
73. Yourman LC, Cenzer IS, Boscardin WJ, et al.
Evaluation of time to beneﬁt of statins for the
primary prevention of cardiovascular events in
adults aged 50 to 75 years: a meta-analysis. JAMA
Intern Med 2021;181:179–185
74. Park SW, Goodpaster BH, Strotmeyer ES,
et al.; Health, Aging, and Body Composition Study.
Accelerated loss of skeletal muscle strength in
older adults with type 2 diabetes: the health,
aging, and body composition study. Diabetes Care
2007;30:1507–1512
75. Park SW, Goodpaster BH, Strotmeyer ES,
et al. Decreased muscle strength and quality in
older adults with type 2 diabetes: the health,
aging, and body composition study. Diabetes
2006;55:1813–1818
76. Pahor M, Guralnik JM, Ambrosius WT, et al.;
LIFE study investigators. Effect of structured
physical activity on prevention of major mobility
disability
in
older
adults:
the
LIFE
study
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2014;311:2387–
2396
77. Gill TM, Baker DI, Gottschalk M, Peduzzi PN,
Allore H, Byers A. A program to prevent functional
decline in physically frail, elderly persons who live
at home. N Engl J Med 2002;347:1068–1074
78. Curtis JM, Horton ES, Bahnson J, et al.; Look
AHEAD Research Group. Prevalence and predictors
of abnormal cardiovascular responses to exercise
testing among individuals with type 2 diabetes: the
Look AHEAD (Action for Health in Diabetes) study.
Diabetes Care 2010;33:901–907
79. Bray G, Gregg E, Haffner S, et al.; Look
Ahead Research Group. Baseline characteristics
of the randomized cohort from the Look AHEAD
(Action for Health in Diabetes) study. Diab Vasc
Dis Res 2006;3:202–215
80. Wing RR, Bolin P, Brancati FL, et al.; Look
AHEAD Research Group. Cardiovascular effects of
intensive lifestyle intervention in type 2 diabetes.
N Engl J Med 2013;369:145–154
81. Gregg EW, Jakicic JM, Blackburn G, et al.;
Look AHEAD Research Group. Association of the
magnitude of weight loss and changes in physical
ﬁtness with long-term cardiovascular disease
outcomes in overweight or obese people with
type 2 diabetes: a post-hoc analysis of the Look
AHEAD randomized clinical trial. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol 2016;4:913–921
82. Gregg EW, Chen H, Wagenknecht LE, et al.;
Look AHEAD Research Group. Association of an
intensive lifestyle intervention with remission of
type 2 diabetes. JAMA 2012;308:2489–2496
83. Rejeski WJ, Bray GA, Chen SH, et al.; Look
AHEAD Research Group. Aging and physical
function in type 2 diabetes: 8 years of an
intensive lifestyle intervention. J Gerontol A Biol
Sci Med Sci 2015;70:345–353
84. Espeland MA, Rejeski WJ, West DS, et al.;
Action for Health in Diabetes Research Group.
Intensive weight loss intervention in older
individuals: results from the Action for Health in
Diabetes Type 2 diabetes mellitus trial. J Am
Geriatr Soc 2013;61:912–922
85. Houston DK, Neiberg RH, Miller ME, et al.
Physical function following a long-term lifestyle
intervention among middle aged and older
adults with type 2 diabetes: the Look AHEAD
study. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2018;73:
1552–1559
86. Simpson FR, Pajewski NM, Nicklas B, et al.;
Indices for Accelerated Aging in Obesity and
Diabetes Ancillary Study of the Action for Health in
Diabetes (Look AHEAD) Trial. Impact of multidomain
lifestyle intervention on frailty through the lens of
deﬁcit accumulation in adults with type 2 diabetes
mellitus. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2020;75:
1921–1927
87. Espeland MA, Gaussoin SA, Bahnson J, et al.
Impact of an 8-year intensive lifestyle intervention
on an index of multimorbidity. J Am Geriatr Soc
2020;68:2249–2256
88. Gregg EW, Lin J, Bardenheier B, et al.; Look
AHEAD Study Group. Impact of intensive lifestyle
intervention on disability-free life expectancy:
the Look AHEAD study. Diabetes Care 2018;41:
1040–1048
89. Valencia WM, Florez H. Pharmacological
treatment of diabetes in older people. Diabetes
Obes Metab 2014;16:1192–1203
90. Zhang JX, Bhaumik D, Huang ES, Meltzer DO.
Change in insurance status and cost-related
medication non-adherence among older U.S.
adults with diabetes from 2010 to 2014. J Health
Med Econ 2018;4:7
91. Schmittdiel JA, Steers N, Duru OK, et al.
Patient-provider communication regarding drug
costs in Medicare Part D beneﬁciaries with
diabetes: a TRIAD Study. BMC Health Serv Res
2010;10:164
92. Patel MR, Resnicow K, Lang I, Kraus K,
Heisler M. Solutions to address diabetes-related
ﬁnancial burden and cost-related nonadherence:
results from a pilot study. Health Educ Behav
2018;45:101–111
93. Arnold SV, Lipska KJ, Wang J, Seman L, Mehta
SN, Kosiborod M. Use of intensive glycemic
management in older adults with diabetes mellitus.
J Am Geriatr Soc 2018;66:1190–1194
94. Andreassen LM, Sandberg S, Kristensen GB,
Sølvik UØ, Kjome RL. Nursing home patients with
diabetes: prevalence, drug treatment and glycemic
control. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2014;105:102–109
95. Lipska KJ, Ross JS, Miao Y, Shah ND, Lee SJ,
Steinman MA. Potential overtreatment of diabetes
mellitus in older adults with tight glycemic control.
JAMA Intern Med 2015;175:356–362
96. Thorpe CT, Gellad WF, Good CB, et al. Tight
glycemic control and use of hypoglycemic
medications in older veterans with type 2
diabetes and comorbid dementia. Diabetes Care
2015;38:588–595
97. McAlister FA,Youngson E, Eurich DT.Treatment
deintensiﬁcation is uncommon in adults with type 2
diabetes mellitus: a retrospective cohort study.
Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2017;10:e003514
98. Seidu S, Kunutsor SK, Topsever P, Hambling
CE, Cos FX, Khunti K. Deintensiﬁcation in older
patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review
of approaches, rates and outcomes. Diabetes
Obes Metab 2019;21:1668–1679
99. Weiner JZ, Gopalan A, Mishra P, et al. Use
and discontinuation of insulin treatment among
adults aged 75 to 79 years with type 2 diabetes.
JAMA Intern Med 2019;179:1633–1641
100. Abdelhaﬁz AH, Sinclair AJ. Deintensiﬁcation
of hypoglycaemic medications-use of a systematic
review approach to highlight safety concerns in
S256
Older Adults
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

older people with type 2 diabetes. J Diabetes
Complications 2018;32:444–450
101. Sussman JB, Kerr EA, Saini SD, et al. Rates of
deintensiﬁcation of blood pressure and glycemic
medication treatment based on levels of control
and life expectancy in older patients with dia-
betes mellitus. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175:
1942–1949
102. Munshi MN, Slyne C, Segal AR, Saul N,
Lyons C, Weinger K. Simpliﬁcation of insulin
regimen in older adults and risk of hypoglycemia.
JAMA Intern Med 2016;176:1023–1025
103. Jude EB, Malecki MT, Gomez Huelgas R,
et al. Expert panel guidance and narrative review
of treatment simpliﬁcation of complex insulin
regimens to improve outcomes in type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes Ther 2022;13:619–634
104. Inzucchi SE, Lipska KJ, Mayo H, Bailey CJ,
McGuire DK. Metformin in patients with type 2
diabetes and kidney disease: a systematic review.
JAMA 2014;312:2668–2675
105. Aroda VR, Edelstein SL, Goldberg RB, et al.;
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.
Long-term metformin use and vitamin B12
deﬁciency in the Diabetes Prevention Program
Outcomes Study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;
101:1754–1761
106. Schwartz AV, Chen H, Ambrosius WT, et al.
Effects of TZD use and discontinuation on fracture
rates in ACCORD bone study. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2015;100:4059–4066
107. Billington EO, Grey A, Bolland MJ. The
effect of thiazolidinediones on bone mineral
density and bone turnover: systematic review
and meta-analysis. Diabetologia 2015;58:2238–
2246
108. American Geriatrics Society 2015 Beers
Criteria Update Expert Panel. American Geriatrics
Society 2015 updated Beers criteria for potentially
inappropriate medication use in older adults. J Am
Geriatr Soc 2015;63:2227–2246
109. Davies MJ, D’Alessio DA, Fradkin J, et al.
Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes,
2018. A consensus report by the American
Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European
Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD).
Diabetes Care 2018;41:2669–2701
110. Leiter LA, Teoh H, Braunwald E, et al.;
SAVOR-TIMI
53
Steering
Committee
and
Investigators. Efﬁcacy and safety of saxagliptin
in older participants in the SAVOR-TIMI 53
trial. Diabetes Care 2015;38:1145–1153
111. Green JB, Bethel MA, Armstrong PW, et al.;
TECOS Study Group. Effect of sitagliptin on
cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N
Engl J Med 2015;373:232–242
112. White WB, Cannon CP, Heller SR, et al.;
EXAMINE Investigators. Alogliptin after acute
coronary syndrome in patients with type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2013;369:1327–1335
113. Karagiannis T, Tsapas A, Athanasiadou E,
et al. GLP-1 receptor agonists and SGLT2 inhibitors
for older people with type 2 diabetes: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract
2021;174:108737
114. Husain M, Birkenfeld AL, Donsmark M,
et al.; PIONEER 6 Investigators. Oral semaglutide
and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with
type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;381:841–851
115. Kushner P, Anderson JE, Simon J, et al.
Efﬁcacy and safety of tirzepatide in adults with
type 2 diabetes: a perspective for primary care
providers. Clin Diabetes 2023;41:258–272
116. Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, et al.;
EMPA-REG OUTCOME Investigators. Empagliﬂozin,
cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2015;373:2117–2128
117. Neal B, Perkovic V, Mahaffey KW, et al.;
CANVAS Program Collaborative Group. Canagliﬂozin
and cardiovascular and renal events in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;377:644–657
118. Wiviott SD, Raz I, Bonaca MP, et al.;
DECLARE–TIMI 58 Investigators. Dapagliﬂozin and
cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N
Engl J Med 2019;380:347–357
119. Bradley MC, Chillarige Y, Lee H, et al. Severe
hypoglycemia risk with long-acting insulin analogs
vs neutral protamine Hagedorn insulin. JAMA
Intern Med 2021;181:598–607
120. Pandya N, Hames E, Sandhu S. Challenges
and strategies for managing diabetes in the
elderly in long-term care settings. Diabetes Spectr
2020;33:236–245
121. Livingstone SJ, Levin D, Looker HC, et al.;
Scottish Diabetes Research Network epidemiology
group; Scottish Renal Registry. Estimated life
expectancy in a Scottish cohort with type 1
diabetes, 2008-2010. JAMA 2015;313:37–44
122. Miller RG, Secrest AM, Sharma RK, Songer TJ,
Orchard TJ. Improvements in the life expectancy of
type 1 diabetes: the Pittsburgh Epidemiology of
Diabetes Complications study cohort. Diabetes
2012;61:2987–2992
123. Bullard KM, Cowie CC, Lessem SE, et al.
Prevalence of diagnosed diabetes in adults by
diabetes type – United States, 2016. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2018;67:359–361
124. Heise T, Nosek L, Rønn BB, et al. Lower
within-subject variability of insulin detemir in
comparison to NPH insulin and insulin glargine in
people with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 2004;53:
1614–1620
125. Munshi MN, Florez H, Huang ES, et al.
Management of diabetes in long-term care and
skilled nursing facilities: a position statement of
the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes
Care 2016;39:308–318
126. Sinclair A, Morley JE, Rodriguez-Ma~nas L,
et al. Diabetes mellitus in older people: position
statement on behalf of the International Association
of Gerontology and Geriatrics (IAGG), the European
Diabetes
Working
Party
for
Older
People
(EDWPOP), and the International Task Force of
Experts in Diabetes. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2012;
13:497–502
127. Dorner B, Friedrich EK, Posthauer ME.
Practice paper of the American Dietetic Association:
individualized nutrition approaches for older adults
in health care communities. J Am Diet Assoc 2010;
110:1554–1563
128. Migdal A, Yarandi SS, Smiley D, Umpierrez
GE. Update on diabetes in the elderly and in
nursing home residents. J Am Med Dir Assoc
2011;12:627–632.e2
129. Pasquel FJ, Powell W, Peng L, et al. A
randomized controlled trial comparing treatment
with oral agents and basal insulin in elderly
patients with type 2 diabetes in long-term care
facilities. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 2015;3:
e000104
130. Quinn K, Hudson P, Dunning T. Diabetes
management in patients receiving palliative care.
J Pain Symptom Manage 2006;32:275–286
131. Kutner JS, Blatchford PJ, Taylor DH Jr, et al.
Safety and beneﬁt of discontinuing statin therapy
in the setting of advanced, life-limiting illness: a
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 2015;
175:691–700
132. Dunning T, Martin P. Palliative and end
of life care of people with diabetes: issues,
challenges and strategies. Diabetes Res Clin Pract
2018;143:454–463
133. Bouc¸a-Machado R, Rosario M, Alarc~ao J,
Correia-Guedes L, Abreu D, Ferreira JJ. Clinical
trials in palliative care: a systematic review of
their methodological characteristics and of the
quality of their reporting. BMC Palliat Care 2017;
16:10
134. Sheppard JP, Burt J, Lown M, et al.;
OPTIMISE Investigators. Effect of antihypertensive
medication reduction vs usual care on short-term
blood
pressure
control
in
patients
with
hypertension aged 80 years and older: the
OPTIMISE randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2020;
323:2039–2051
135. Ford-Dunn S, Smith A, Quin J. Management
of diabetes during the last days of life: attitudes
of consultant diabetologists and consultant
palliative care physicians in the UK. Palliat Med
2006;20:197–203
136. Petrillo LA, Gan S, Jing B, Lang-Brown S,
Boscardin WJ, Lee SJ. Hypoglycemia in hospice
patients with type 2 diabetes in a national
sample of nursing homes. JAMA Intern Med
2018;178:713–715
137. Mallery LH, Ransom T, Steeves B, Cook B,
Dunbar P, Moorhouse P. Evidence-informed
guidelines for treating frail older adults with type 2
diabetes: from the Diabetes Care Program of Nova
Scotia (DCPNS) and the Palliative and Therapeutic
Harmonization (PATH) program. J Am Med Dir
Assoc 2013;14:801–808
138. Munshi MN, Slyne C, Segal AR, Saul N, Lyons
C, Weinger K. Liberating A1C goals in older adults
may not protect against the risk of hypoglycemia. J
Diabetes Complications 2017;31:1197–1199
diabetesjournals.org/care
Older Adults
S257
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

14. Children and Adolescents:
Standards of Care in Diabetes—
2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S258–S281 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S014
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes
the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the
components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to
evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee, an
interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of
Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA
standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s
clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee
members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to com-
ment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
The management of diabetes in children and adolescents (individuals <18 years of
age) cannot simply be derived from care routinely provided to adults with diabetes.
The epidemiology, pathophysiology, developmental considerations, and response to
therapy in pediatric diabetes are often different from those of adult diabetes. There
are also differences in recommended care for children and adolescents with type 1 di-
abetes, type 2 diabetes, and other forms of pediatric diabetes. This section is divided
into two major parts: the ﬁrst part addresses care for children and adolescents with
type 1 diabetes, and the second part addresses care for children and adolescents
with type 2 diabetes. Monogenic diabetes (neonatal diabetes and maturity-onset dia-
betes of the young [MODY]) and cystic ﬁbrosis–related diabetes, which are often pre-
sent in youth, are discussed in Section 2, “Diagnosis and Classiﬁcation of Diabetes.”
Table 14.1A and Table 14.1B provide an overview of the recommendations for
screening and treatment of complications and related conditions in pediatric type 1
diabetes and type 2 diabetes, respectively. In addition to comprehensive diabetes
care, youth with diabetes should receive age-appropriate and developmentally appro-
priate pediatric care, including immunizations as recommended by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (1). To ensure continuity of care as an adoles-
cent with diabetes becomes an adult, guidance is provided at the end of this section
on the transition from pediatric to adult diabetes care.
Due to the nature of pediatric clinical research, the recommendations for children
and adolescents with diabetes are less likely to be based on clinical trial evidence. How-
ever, expert opinion and a review of available and relevant experimental data are sum-
marized in the American Diabetes Association (ADA) position statements “Type 1
Diabetes in Children and Adolescents” (2) and “Evaluation and Management of Youth-
Onset Type 2 Diabetes” (3). Finally, other sections in the Standards of Care may have
recommendations that apply to youth with diabetes and are referenced in the narrative
of this section.
*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice
Committee can be found at https://doi.org/
10.2337/dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee. 14. Children and
adolescents: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2024.
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S258–S281
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
14. CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS
S258
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Table 14.1A—Recommendations for screening and treatment of complications and related conditions in pediatric type 1 diabetes
Thyroid disease
Celiac disease
Hypertension
Nephropathy
Retinopathy
Neuropathy
Dyslipidemia
Corresponding
recommendations
14.28 and 14.29
14.30–14.32
14.33–14.36
14.42 and 14.43
14.44–14.46
14.47
14.37–14.41
Method
Thyroid-stimulating
hormone; consider
antithyroglobulin
and antithyroid
peroxidase
antibodies
IgA tTG if total IgA
normal; IgG tTG and
deamidated gliadin
antibodies if IgA
deﬁcient
Blood pressure
monitoring
Albumin-to-creatinine
ratio; random sample
acceptable initially
Dilated fundoscopy or
retinal photography
Foot exam with foot
pulses, pinprick, 10-g
monoﬁlament sensation
tests, vibration, and
ankle reﬂexes
Lipid proﬁle, nonfasting
acceptable initially
When to start
Soon after diagnosis
Soon after diagnosis
At diagnosis
Puberty or $10 years
old, whichever is
earlier, and diabetes
duration of 5 years
Puberty or $11 years
old, whichever is
earlier, and diabetes
duration of
3–5 years
Puberty or $10 years old,
whichever is earlier,
and diabetes duration
of 5 years
Soon after diagnosis;
preferably after
glycemia has
improved and
$2 years old
Follow-up frequency
Every 1–2 years if
thyroid antibodies
negative; more often
if symptoms develop
or presence of
thyroid antibodies
Within 2 years and
then at 5 years
after diagnosis;
sooner if symptoms
develop
Every visit
If normal, annually; if
abnormal, repeat
with conﬁrmation in
two of three samples
over 6 months
If normal, every
2 years; consider
less frequently
(every 4 years)
if A1C <8% and
eye professional
agrees
If normal, annually
If LDL <100 mg/dL,
repeat at 9–11 years
old; then, if <100
mg/dL, every
3 years
Goal
NA
NA
<90th percentile for
age, sex, and height;
if $13 years old,
<120/80 mmHg
Albumin-to-creatinine
ratio <30 mg/g
No retinopathy
No neuropathy
LDL <100 mg/dL
Treatment
Appropriate treatment
of underlying thyroid
disorder
After conﬁrmation,
start gluten-free
diet
Lifestyle modiﬁcation
for elevated blood
pressure (90th to
<95th percentile for
age, sex, and height
or, if $13 years old,
120–129/<80 mmHg);
lifestyle modiﬁcation
and ACE inhibitor or
ARB* for hypertension
($95th percentile for
age, sex, and height
or, if $13 years old,
$130/80 mmHg)
Optimize glycemia and
blood pressure; ACE
inhibitor* if albumin-
to-creatinine ratio is
elevated in two of
three samples over
6 months
Optimize glycemia;
treatment per
ophthalmology
Optimize glycemia;
referral to neurology
If abnormal, optimize
glycemia and
medical nutrition
therapy; if after
6 months LDL
>160 mg/dL or
>130 mg/dL with
cardiovascular risk
factor(s), initiate
statin therapy (for
those aged
>10 years)*
ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; NA, not applicable; tTG, tissue transglutaminase. *Due to the potential teratogenic effects, individuals of childbearing age should receive reproductive counseling,
and medication should be avoided in individuals of childbearing age who are not using reliable contraception.
diabetesjournals.org/care
Children and Adolescents
S259
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Table 14.1B—Recommendations for screening and treatment of complications and related conditions in pediatric type 2 diabetes
Hypertension
Nephropathy
Neuropathy
Retinopathy
Dyslipidemia
Nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease
Obstructive
sleep apnea
Polycystic ovarian
syndrome (for
adolescent
femaleindividuals)
Corresponding
recommendations
14.74–14.77
14.78–14.83
14.84 and 14.85
14.86–14.89
14.96–14.100
14.90 and 14.91
14.92
14.93 and 14.94
Method
Blood pressure
monitoring
Albumin-to-
creatinine ratio;
random sample
acceptable
initially
Foot exam with foot
pulses, pinprick,
10-g monoﬁlament
sensation tests,
vibration, and
ankle reﬂexes
Dilated fundoscopy
Lipid proﬁle
AST and ALT
measurement
Screening for
symptoms
Screening for
symptoms;
laboratory
evaluation if
positive symptoms
When to start
At diagnosis
At diagnosis
At diagnosis
At/soon after
diagnosis
Soon after diagnosis,
preferably after
glycemia has
improved
At diagnosis
At diagnosis
At diagnosis
Follow-up frequency Every visit
If normal, annually;
if abnormal,
repeat with
conﬁrmation
in two of three
samples over
6 months
If normal, annually
If normal, annually
Annually
Annually
Every visit
Every visit
Goal
<90th percentile for
age, sex, and height;
if $13 years old,
<130/80 mmHg
<30 mg/g
No neuropathy
No retinopathy
LDL <100 mg/dL,
HDL >35 mg/dL,
triglycerides
<150 mg/dL
NA
NA
NA
Treatment
Lifestyle modiﬁcation
for elevated blood
pressure (90th to
<95th percentile for
age, sex, and height
or, if $13 years old,
120–129/<80 mmHg);
lifestyle modiﬁcation
and ACE inhibitor or
ARB* for hypertension
($95th percentile for
age, sex, and height
or, if $13 years,
$130/80 mmHg)
Optimize glycemia
and blood
pressure; ACE
inhibitor*
if albumin-to-
creatinine ratio
is elevated in
two of three
samples over
6 months
Optimize glycemia;
referral to
neurology
Optimize glycemia;
treatment per
ophthalmology
If abnormal, optimize
glycemia and
medical nutrition
therapy; if LDL
>130 mg/dL after
6 months, initiate
statin therapy (for
those aged
>10 years)*; if
triglycerides
>400 mg/dL
fasting or >1,000
mg/dL nonfasting,
begin ﬁbrate
Refer to
gastroenterology
for persistently
elevated or
worsening
transaminases
If positive
symptoms,
refer to sleep
specialist and
polysomnogram
If no contraindications,
oral contraceptive
pills; medical
nutrition therapy;
metformin
ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; NA, not applicable; tTG, tissue transglutaminase. *Due to the potential teratogenic effects, individuals of childbearing age should receive reproductive counseling, and
medication should be avoided in individuals of childbearing age who are not using reliable contraception.
S260
Children and Adolescents
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

TYPE 1 DIABETES
Type 1 diabetes is the most common form
of diabetes in youth (4), although data sug-
gest that it accounts for a large proportion
of cases diagnosed in adult life (5). The
health care professional must consider the
unique aspects of care and management
of children and adolescents with type 1
diabetes, such as changes in insulin sensi-
tivity related to physical growth and sexual
maturation, ability to provide self-care,
supervision in the childcare and school en-
vironment, neurological vulnerability to hy-
poglycemia and hyperglycemia in young
children, and possible adverse neurocog-
nitive effects of diabetic ketoacidosis
(DKA) (6,7). Attention to family dynamics,
developmental stages, and physiologic
differences related to sexual maturity is
essential in developing and implementing
an optimal diabetes treatment plan (8).
An interprofessional team trained in
pediatric diabetes management and sensi-
tive to the challenges of children and ado-
lescents with type 1 diabetes and their
families should provide diabetes-speciﬁc
care for this population. It is essential that
diabetes self-management education and
support, medical nutrition therapy, and
psychosocial/behavioral support be pro-
vided at diagnosis and regularly thereafter
in a developmentally appropriate format
that builds on prior knowledge by a team
of health care professionals experienced
with the biological, educational, nutritional,
behavioral, and emotional needs of the
growing child and family. The diabetes
team, taking into consideration the youth’s
developmental and psychosocial needs,
should ask about and discuss diabetes man-
agement responsibilities with youth and pa-
rents/caregivers on an ongoing basis.
Diabetes Self-Management Education
and Support
Recommendation
14.1 Youth with type 1 diabetes and
their parents/caregivers (for individu-
als aged <18 years) should receive
culturally sensitive and developmen-
tally appropriate individualized diabe-
tes self-management education and
support according to national stand-
ards at diagnosis and routinely there-
after. B
Self-management in pediatric diabetes in-
volves both the youth and their parents/
adult caregivers. No matter how sound
the medical plan is, it can only be effec-
tive if the family and/or affected individu-
als are able to implement it. Family
involvement is a vital component of opti-
mal diabetes management throughout
childhood and adolescence. As parents/
caregivers are critical to diabetes self-
management in youth, diabetes care re-
quires an approach that places the youth
and their parents/caregivers at the center
of the care model. The pediatric diabetes
care team must be capable of evaluating
the educational, behavioral, emotional,
and psychosocial factors that impact the
implementation of a treatment plan and
must work with the youth and family to
overcome barriers or redeﬁne goals as
appropriate. Diabetes self-management
education and support requires periodic
reassessment, especially as the youth
grows, develops, and acquires the need
and desire for greater independent self-
care skills. The pediatric diabetes team
should work with the youth and their pa-
rents/caregivers to ensure there is not a
premature transfer of self-management
tasks to the youth during this time. In addi-
tion, it is necessary to assess the educa-
tional needs and skills of, and provide
training to, daycare workers, school nurses,
and school personnel who are responsible
for the care and supervision of the child
with diabetes (2,9,10).
Nutrition Therapy
Recommendations
14.2 Individualized medical nutrition
therapy is recommended for youth
with type 1 diabetes as an essential
component of the overall treatment
plan. A
14.3 Monitoring carbohydrate intake,
whether by carbohydrate counting or
experience-based estimation, is a
key component to optimizing glyce-
mic management. B
14.4
Meal
composition
impacts
postprandial glucose excursions. Ed-
ucation on the impact of high-fat
and high-protein meals and the ad-
justment of insulin dosing is neces-
sary. A
14.5 Comprehensive nutrition edu-
cation at diagnosis, with at least
annual updates and as needed, by
an experienced registered dietitian
nutritionist is recommended to as-
sess caloric and nutrition intake in
relation to weight status and car-
diovascular disease risk factors and
to inform macronutrient choices. E
Nutrition management should be individ-
ualized: family habits, food preferences,
religious or cultural needs, ﬁnances, sched-
ules, physical activity, and the youth’s and
family’s abilities in numeracy, literacy, and
self-management should be considered.
Visits with a registered dietitian nutritionist
should include assessment for changes in
food preferences over time, access to
food, growth, and development, weight
status, cardiovascular risk, and potential
for disordered eating. Following recom-
mended nutrition plans is associated with
better glycemic outcomes in youth with
type 1 diabetes (11).
Although carbohydrate content is the
primary variable for calculation of meal
insulin dose, it is well known that meals
with higher content of fat and protein
can cause early hypoglycemia and de-
layed postprandial excursion. Some ad-
justments in insulin dosing, including an
increase in the calculated dose as well
as a split dose, will improve postpran-
dial glucose management (12–28).
Physical Activity and Exercise
Recommendations
14.6 Physical activity is recommended
for all youth with type 1 diabetes with
the goal of 60 min of moderate- to
vigorous-intensity aerobic activity daily,
with vigorous muscle-strengthening and
bone-strengthening activities at least
3 days per week. C
14.7 Frequent glucose monitoring
before, during, and after exercise,
via blood glucose meter or continu-
ous glucose monitoring (CGM), is
important to prevent, detect, and
treat hypoglycemia and hyperglyce-
mia associated with exercise. C
14.8 Youth and their parents/care-
givers should receive education on
goals and management of glycemia
before, during, and after physical ac-
tivity, individualized according to the
type and intensity of the planned
physical activity. E
14.9 Youth and their parents/care-
givers should be educated on strate-
gies to prevent hypoglycemia during,
after, and overnight following physical
activity
and
exercise,
which
may
diabetesjournals.org/care
Children and Adolescents
S261
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

include reducing prandial insulin dos-
ing for the meal/snack preceding
(and, if needed, following) exercise, re-
ducing basal insulin doses, increasing
carbohydrate intake, eating bedtime
snacks, and/or using CGM. Treatment
for hypoglycemia should be accessible
before, during, and after engaging in
activity. C
Physical activity and structured exercise
positively impact metabolic and psycholog-
ical health in children with type 1 diabetes
(29). While it affects insulin sensitivity,
physical ﬁtness, strength building, weight
management, social interaction, mood,
self-esteem building, and the creation of
healthful habits for adulthood, it also has
the potential to cause both hypoglycemia
and hyperglycemia.
See below for strategies to mitigate
hypoglycemia risk and minimize hyper-
glycemia associated with exercise. For
an in-depth discussion, see reviews and
guidelines (30–32).
Overall, it is recommended that
youth participate in 60 min of moderate-
intensity (e.g., brisk walking or dancing) to
vigorous-intensity (e.g., running or jump-
ing rope) aerobic activity daily, including
resistance and ﬂexibility training (33). Al-
though uncommon in the pediatric popula-
tion, youth should be medically evaluated
for comorbid conditions or diabetes com-
plications that may restrict participation in
an exercise program. As hyperglycemia
can occur before, during, and after physi-
cal activity, it is important to ensure that
the elevated glucose level is not related to
insulin deﬁciency that would lead to wors-
ening hyperglycemia with exercise and
ketosis risk. Intense activity should be
postponed with marked hyperglycemia
(glucose $350 mg/dL [$19.4 mmol/L]),
moderate to large urine ketones, and/or
b-hydroxybutyrate (B-OHB) >1.5 mmol/L.
Caution may be needed when B-OHB lev-
els are $0.6 mmol/L (11,30).
The prevention and treatment of hy-
poglycemia associated with physical activ-
ity include decreasing the prandial insulin
for the meal/snack before exercise and/or
increasing food intake. Youth on insulin
pumps without automated insulin delivery
(AID) can lower basal rates by 10–50%
or more or suspend for 1–2 h during exer-
cise (34). Decreasing basal rates or long-
acting insulin doses by 20% after exer-
cise may reduce delayed exercise-induced
hypoglycemia (35). Accessible rapid-acting
carbohydrates and frequent blood glu-
cose monitoring before, during, and after
exercise, with or without continuous glu-
cose monitoring (CGM), maximize safety
with exercise. The use of AID systems
may improve time in range (TIR) (70–180
mg/dL) during exercise, and youth can
use brand-speciﬁc settings that are more
conservative or increase the glycemic
goal to prevent hypoglycemia (36).
Blood glucose goals prior to physi-
cal activity and exercise should be
126–180 mg/dL (7.0–10.0 mmol/L) but
should be individualized based on the
type, intensity, and duration of activity
(30,32). Consider additional carbohydrate
intake during and/or after exercise, de-
pending on the duration and intensity of
physical activity, to prevent hypoglyce-
mia. For low- to moderate-intensity aero-
bic activities (30–60 min), and if the
youth is fasting, 10–15 g of carbohydrate
may prevent hypoglycemia (32). After in-
sulin boluses (relative hyperinsulinemia),
consider 0.5–1.0 g of carbohydrates/kg
per hour of exercise (30–60 g), which is
similar to carbohydrate requirements to
optimize performance in athletes without
type 1 diabetes (37–39).
In addition, obesity is as common in
youth with type 1 diabetes as in those
without diabetes. It is associated with a
higher frequency of cardiovascular risk fac-
tors, and it disproportionately affects ra-
cial/ethnic minorities in the U.S. (40–44).
Therefore, diabetes health care professio-
nals should monitor weight status and en-
courage a healthy eating pattern, physical
activity, and healthy weight as key compo-
nents of pediatric type 1 diabetes care.
School and Child Care
As a large portion of a youth’s day is
spent in school and/or day care, training
of school or day care personnel to pro-
vide care in accordance with the child’s
individualized diabetes medical manage-
ment plan is essential for optimal diabe-
tes management and safe access to all
school or day care–sponsored opportu-
nities (10,45,46). In addition, federal
and state laws require schools, day care
facilities, and other entities to provide
needed diabetes care to enable the
child to safely access the school or day
care environment. Refer to the ADA po-
sition statements “Diabetes Care in the
School Setting” (10) and “Care of Young
Children With Diabetes in the Childcare
and Community Setting” (46) and the
ADA’s Safe at School website (diabetes
.org/resources/know-your-rights/safe-at-
school-state-laws) for additional details.
Psychosocial Care
Recommendations
14.10 At diagnosis and during routine
follow-up care, screen youth with
type 1 diabetes for psychosocial con-
cerns (e.g., diabetes distress, depres-
sive symptoms, and disordered eating),
family factors, and behavioral health
concerns that could impact diabetes
managementwithage-appropriatestan-
dardized and validated tools. Refer to a
qualiﬁed behavioral health professional,
preferably experienced in childhood dia-
betes, when indicated. B
14.11 Behavioral health professio-
nals should be considered integral
members of the pediatric diabetes
interprofessional team. E
14.12 Encourage developmentally ap-
propriate family involvement in diabe-
tes management tasks for children and
adolescents, recognizing that prema-
ture or unsupportive transfer of diabe-
tes care responsibility to the youth
can contribute to diabetes distress,
lower engagement in diabetes self-
management behaviors, and deterio-
ration in glycemia. A
14.13 Health care professionals should
screen for food security, housing stabil-
ity/homelessness, health literacy, ﬁ-
nancial barriers, and social/community
support and apply that information to
treatment decisions. E
14.14 Health care professionals should
consider asking youth and their pa-
rents/caregivers about social adjust-
ment (peer relationships) and school
performance to determine whether
further intervention is needed. B
14.15 Offer adolescents time by them-
selves with their health care professio-
nal(s) starting at age 12 years or when
developmentally appropriate. E
14.16 Starting at puberty, preconcep-
tion counseling should be incorporated
into routine diabetes care for all indi-
viduals of childbearing potential. A
Rapid and dynamic cognitive, develop-
mental, and emotional changes occur dur-
ing childhood, adolescence, and emerging
adulthood. Diabetes management during
S262
Children and Adolescents
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

childhood and adolescence places sub-
stantial burdens on the youth and family,
necessitating ongoing assessment of psy-
chosocial status, social determinants of
health, and diabetes distress in the youth
and the parents/caregivers during routine
diabetes visits (47–55). It is important to
consider the impact of diabetes on quality
of life as well as the development of behav-
ioral health problems related to diabetes
distress, fear of hypoglycemia (and hyper-
glycemia), symptoms of anxiety, disordered
eating behaviors and eating disorders, and
symptoms of depression (50,56). Consider
screening youth for diabetes distress, gen-
erally starting at 7 or 8 years of age (56), us-
ing validated tools for youth and their
parents/caregivers (57). Consider screening
for depression and disordered eating be-
haviors using available screening tools
(58,59). Early detection of depression, anx-
iety, disordered eating, and learning dis-
abilities can facilitate effective treatment
options and help minimize adverse effects
on diabetes management and disease
outcomes (50,56). When psychological
symptoms are identiﬁed, referral to a be-
havioral health professional, ideally with
experience in pediatric diabetes, may be
warranted. Such professionals can provide
individualized, evidence-based behavioral
health care services, including cognitive-
behavioral, mindfulness-based, and other
interventions (60), to improve psychosocial
functioning in youth with type 1 diabetes
(61–63).
The complexities of diabetes manage-
ment require ongoing parental involve-
ment in care throughout childhood and
adolescence. Developmentally appropri-
ate, supportive family teamwork between
the growing youth and parent can help
maintain engagement in self-management
behaviors and reduce deterioration in gly-
cemia (64,65). It is appropriate to inquire
about diabetes-speciﬁc family relation-
ships, including family teamwork and con-
ﬂict, during visits; health care professionals
can both help families negotiate a plan
and refer to an appropriate behavioral
health professional for more in-depth sup-
port (66). Such professionals can conduct
further assessment and deliver evidence-
based behavioral interventions to support
developmentally appropriate, collabora-
tive family involvement in diabetes self-
management (61,63). Monitoring of social
adjustment (peer relationships) and school
performance can facilitate both well-being
and academic achievement (67). Diabetes
management and glycemic levels may be
related to academic progress and stu-
dents’ functioning in the school setting,
which highlights the need for appropriate
accommodations and access to diabetes-
related support in school (68).
Shared decision-making with youth
regarding the adoption of management
plan components and self-management
behaviors can improve diabetes self-
efﬁcacy, participation in diabetes care, and
metabolic outcomes (41,69). Although cog-
nitive abilities vary, the ethical position of-
ten adopted is the “mature minor rule,”
whereby children after age 12 or 13 years
who appear to be “mature” have the right
to consent or withhold consent to general
medical treatment, except in cases in
which refusal would signiﬁcantly endanger
health (70).
Beginning at the onset of puberty or
at diagnosis of diabetes, all individuals
with childbearing potential should re-
ceive education about the risks of fetal
malformations associated with elevated
A1C and the use of effective contracep-
tion to prevent unplanned pregnancy.
Preconception counseling using devel-
opmentally appropriate educational and
behavioral strategies enables individuals
of childbearing potential to make well-
informed decisions (71). Preconception
counseling resources tailored for ado-
lescents
are
available
at
no
cost
through the ADA (72). Refer to the
ADA position statement “Psychosocial
Care for People With Diabetes” for fur-
ther details (56).
Youth with type 1 diabetes have an in-
creased risk of disordered eating behavior
as well as clinical eating disorders, with
serious short-term and long-term nega-
tive effects on diabetes outcomes and
health in general. It is important to recog-
nize the unique and dangerous disor-
dered eating behavior of insulin omission
for weight management in type 1 diabe-
tes (73) using tools such as the Diabetes
Eating Problems Survey-Revised (DEPS-R)
to allow for early diagnosis and interven-
tion (59,74–76). Given the complexity of
treating disordered eating behaviors, col-
laboration between the diabetes health
care team and a behavioral health pro-
fessional, ideally with expertise in disor-
dered eating behaviors and diabetes, is
recommended.
The presence of a behavioral health
professional on pediatric interprofessional
teamshighlightstheimportanceofattending
to the psychosocial issues of diabetes.
These psychosocial factors are signiﬁcantly
related to self-management difﬁculties,
elevated A1C, reduced quality of life, and
higher rates of acute and chronic diabetes
complications.
Glycemic Monitoring, Insulin
Delivery, and Goals
Recommendations
14.17 All youth with type 1 diabetes
should monitor glucose levels multiple
times daily (up to 6–10 times/day by
blood glucose meter or CGM), includ-
ing prior to meals and snacks, at bed-
time, and as needed for safety in
speciﬁc situations such as physical ac-
tivity, driving, or the presence of symp-
toms of hypoglycemia. B
14.18 Real-time CGM A or intermit-
tently scanned CGM E should be of-
fered for diabetes management at
diagnosis oras soon as possible in youth
with diabetes on multiple daily injec-
tions or insulin pump therapy who are
capable of using the device safely (ei-
ther by themselves or with caregivers).
The choice of device should be made
based on the individual’s and family’s
circumstances, desires, and needs.
14.19
Automated
insulin
delivery
(AID) systems should be offered for
diabetes management to youth with
type 1 diabetes who are capable of
using the device safely (either by
themselves or with caregivers). The
choice of device should be made
based on the individual’s and family’s
circumstances, desires, and needs. A
14.20 Insulin pump therapy alone
should be offered for diabetes man-
agement to youth on multiple daily
injections with type 1 diabetes who
are capable of using the device safely
(either by themselves or with care-
givers) if unable to use AID systems.
The choice of device should be made
based on the individual’s and family’s
circumstances, desires, and needs. A
14.21 Students must be supported at
school in the use of diabetes technol-
ogy, including continuous glucose mon-
itors, insulin pumps, connected insulin
pens, and AID systems as prescribed by
their diabetes care team. E
14.22 A1C goals must be individualized
and reassessed over time. An A1C of
<7% (<53 mmol/mol) is appropriate
for many children and adolescents. B
diabetesjournals.org/care
Children and Adolescents
S263
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

14.23 Less stringent A1C goals (such
as <7.5% [<58 mmol/mol]) may be
appropriate for youth who cannot ar-
ticulate symptoms of hypoglycemia;
have hypoglycemia unawareness; lack
access to analog insulins, advanced in-
sulin delivery technology, and/or CGM;
cannot check blood glucose regularly;
or have nonglycemic factors that in-
crease A1C (e.g., high glycators). B
14.24 Even less stringent A1C goals
(such as <8% [<64 mmol/mol]) may
be appropriate for individuals with a
history of severe hypoglycemia, lim-
ited life expectancy, or where the
harms of treatment are greater than
the beneﬁts. B
14.25 Health care professionals may
reasonably suggest more stringent A1C
goals (such as <6.5% [<48 mmol/mol])
for selected individuals if they can be
achieved without signiﬁcant hypogly-
cemia, negative impacts on well-being,
or undue burden of care or in those
who have nonglycemic factors that
decrease A1C (e.g., lower erythrocyte
life span). Lower goals may also be ap-
propriate
during
the
honeymoon
phase. B
14.26 CGM metrics derived from con-
tinuous glucose monitor use over the
most recent 14 days (or longer for
youth with more glycemic variability),
including time in range (70–180 mg/dL
[3.9–10.0 mmol/L]), time below range
(<70 mg/dL [<3.9 mmol/L] and
<54 mg/dL [<3.0 mmol/L]), and
time above range (>180 mg/dL
[>10.0 mmol/L] and >250 mg/dL
[>13.9 mmol/L]), are recommended
to be used in conjunction with A1C
whenever possible. E
Current standards for diabetes manage-
ment reﬂect the need to minimize hy-
perglycemia as safely as possible. The
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
(DCCT), which did not enroll children
<13 years of age, demonstrated that near
normalization of blood glucose levels was
more difﬁcult to achieve in adolescents
than in adults. Nevertheless, the increased
use of basal-bolus plans, insulin pumps,
frequent blood glucose monitoring, CGM,
AID systems, goal setting, and improved
patient education has been associated
with more children and adolescents reach-
ing the blood glucose goals recommended
by the ADA (77–79), particularly in families
in which both the parents/caregivers and
the child with diabetes participate jointly
to perform the required diabetes-related
tasks.
Lower A1C in adolescence and young
adulthood is associated with a lower risk
and rate of microvascular and macrovas-
cular complications (80–83) and demon-
strates the effects of metabolic memory
(84–87).
In addition, type 1 diabetes can be as-
sociated with adverse effects on cogni-
tion during childhood and adolescence
(6,88–90), and neurocognitive imaging
differences related to hyperglycemia in
children provide another motivation for
achieving glycemic goals (6). DKA has
been shown to cause adverse effects on
brain development and function. Addi-
tional factors (91–94) that contribute to
adverse effects on brain development
and function include young age, severe
hypoglycemia at <6 years of age, and
chronic hyperglycemia (95,96). However,
meticulous use of therapeutic modalities
such as rapid- and long-acting insulin ana-
logs, technological advances (e.g., CGM,
sensor-augmented pump therapy, and AID
systems), and intensive self-management
education now make it more feasible to
achieve glycemic goals while reducing the
incidence of severe hypoglycemia (97–120).
Please refer to Section 7, “Diabetes
Technology,” for more information on
technology to support people with diabetes.
In selecting individualized glycemic
goals, the long-term health beneﬁts of
achieving a lower A1C should be bal-
anced against the risks of hypoglycemia
and the developmental burdens of in-
tensive treatment plans in youth (121).
Recent data with newer devices and insu-
lins indicate that the risk of hypoglycemia
with lower A1C is less than it was before
(122–131). Some data suggest that there
could be a threshold where lower A1C
is associated with more hypoglycemia
(132,133); however, the conﬁdence inter-
vals were large, suggesting great variability.
In addition, achieving lower A1C levels is
likely facilitated by setting lower A1C goals
(134,135). Lower goals may be possible
during the honeymoon phase of type 1 di-
abetes. Special consideration should be
given to the risk of hypoglycemia in young
children (aged <6 years) who are often
unable to recognize, articulate, and/or
manage hypoglycemia. However, registry
dataindicate that A1Cgoals can be achieved
in children, including those aged <6 years,
without increased risk of severe hypogly-
cemia (123,134). Recent data have dem-
onstrated that the use of real-time CGM
lowered A1C and increased TIR in adoles-
cents and young adults and, in children
aged <8 years old, was associated with
a lower risk of hypoglycemia (136,137).
Please refer to Section 6, “Glycemic Goals
and Hypoglycemia,” for more information
on glycemic assessment.
A strong relationship exists between
the frequency of blood glucose monitor-
ing and glycemic management (118–120,
138–144). Glucose levels for all children
and adolescents with type 1 diabetes
should be monitored multiple times daily
by blood glucose monitoring and/or CGM.
Recent data on children and adults sug-
gest that use of CGM soon after type 1
diabetes diagnosis is associated with im-
proved A1C (104,105,145). In the U.S.,
real-time CGM is approved for nonadjunc-
tive use in children aged 2 years and older
and intermittently scanned CGM is ap-
proved for nonadjunctive use in children
aged 4 years and older. Parents/caregivers
and youth should be offered initial and
ongoing education and support for CGM
use. Behavioral support may further im-
prove ongoing CGM use (137). Metrics de-
rived from CGM include percent time in
target range, below target range, and
above target range (146). While studies in-
dicate a relationship between TIR and
A1C (147,148), it is still uncertain what
the ideal goal TIR should be for children,
and further studies are needed. Please re-
fer to Section 7, “Diabetes Technology,”
for more information on the use of blood
glucose meters, CGM, and insulin pumps.
More information on insulin injection
technique can be found in Section 9,
“Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic
Treatment.”
Key Concepts in Setting Glycemic Goals
• Glycemic goals should be individu-
alized, and lower goals may be rea-
sonable based on a beneﬁt–risk
assessment.
• Blood glucose goals should be modi-
ﬁed in children with frequent hypogly-
cemia or hypoglycemia unawareness.
• Postprandial blood glucose values
should be measured when there is a
discrepancy between preprandial blood
glucose values and A1C levels and to
S264
Children and Adolescents
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

assess preprandial insulin doses in
those on basal-bolus or pump plans.
Autoimmune Conditions
Recommendation
14.27 Assess for additional autoim-
mune conditions soon after the di-
agnosis of type 1 diabetes and if
symptoms develop. B
Because of the increased frequency of
other autoimmune diseases in type 1 dia-
betes, screening for thyroid dysfunction
and celiac disease should be considered
(149–153). Periodic screening in asymp-
tomatic individuals has been recom-
mended, but the optimal frequency of
screening is unclear.
Although much less common than thy-
roid dysfunction and celiac disease, other
autoimmune conditions, such as Addison
disease (primary adrenal insufﬁciency),
autoimmune hepatitis, autoimmune gas-
tritis, dermatomyositis, and myasthenia
gravis, occur more commonly in the popu-
lation with type 1 diabetes than in the
general pediatric population and should
be assessed and monitored as clinically in-
dicated. In addition, relatives of youth
with type 1 diabetes should be offered
testing for islet autoantibodies through re-
search studies (e.g., TrialNet) and national
programs for early diagnosis of preclinical
type 1 diabetes (stages 1 and 2).
Thyroid Disease
Recommendations
14.28 Consider testing children with
type 1 diabetes for antithyroid per-
oxidase and antithyroglobulin anti-
bodies soon after diagnosis. B
14.29 Measurethyroid-stimulatinghor-
mone concentrations at diagnosis when
clinically stable or soon after optimizing
glycemia. If normal, suggest rechecking
every 1–2 years or sooner if the youth
has positive thyroid antibodies or devel-
ops symptoms or signs suggestive of
thyroid dysfunction, thyromegaly, an
abnormal growth rate, or unexplained
glycemic variability. B
Autoimmune thyroid disease is the most
common autoimmune disorder associ-
ated with diabetes, occurring in 17–30%
of individuals with type 1 diabetes (150,
154,155). At the time of diagnosis, 25%
of children with type 1 diabetes have
thyroid autoantibodies (156), the pres-
ence of which is predictive of thyroid
dysfunction—most commonly hypothy-
roidism, although hyperthyroidism oc-
curs in 0.5% of people with type 1
diabetes (157,158). For thyroid autoanti-
bodies, a study from Sweden indicated
that antithyroid peroxidase antibodies
were more predictive than antithyroglo-
bulin antibodies in multivariate analysis
(159). Thyroid function tests may be mis-
leading (euthyroid sick syndrome) if per-
formed at the time of diagnosis owing
to the effect of previous hyperglycemia,
ketosis or ketoacidosis, weight loss, etc.
Therefore, if performed at diagnosis and
slightly abnormal, thyroid function tests
should be repeated soon after a period of
metabolic stability and achievement ofgly-
cemic goals. Subclinical hypothyroidism
may be associated with an increased risk
of symptomatic hypoglycemia (160) and a
reduced linear growth rate. Hyperthyroid-
ism alters glucose metabolism and usually
causes deterioration of glycemia.
Celiac Disease
Recommendations
14.30 Screen youth with type 1 dia-
betes for celiac disease by measuring
IgA tissue transglutaminase (tTG) anti-
bodies, with documentation of nor-
mal total serum IgA levels, soon after
the diagnosis of diabetes, or IgG tTG
and deamidated gliadin antibodies if
IgA is deﬁcient. B
14.31 Repeat screening for celiac dis-
ease within 2 years of diabetes diagno-
sis and then again after 5 years and
consider more frequent screening in
youth who have symptoms or a ﬁrst-
degree relative with celiac disease. B
14.32 Individuals with conﬁrmed ce-
liac disease should be placed on a
gluten-free diet for treatment and to
avoid complications. Youth and their
caregivers should also have a consul-
tation with a registered dietitian nu-
tritionist experienced in managing
both diabetes and celiac disease. B
Celiac disease is an immune-mediated
disorder that occurs with increased fre-
quency in people with type 1 diabetes
(1.6–16.4% of individuals compared with
0.3–1% in the general population) (149,
152,153,161–165). Screening people with
type 1 diabetes for celiac disease is further
justiﬁed by its association with osteoporosis,
iron deﬁciency, growth failure, and potential
increased risk of retinopathy and albumin-
uria (166–169).
Screening for celiac disease includes
measuring serum levels of IgA and tis-
sue transglutaminase (tTG) IgA antibod-
ies, or, with IgA deﬁciency, screening
can include measuring tTG IgG antibod-
ies or deamidated gliadin peptide IgG
antibodies. Because most cases of celiac
disease are diagnosed within the ﬁrst
5 years after the diagnosis of type 1 dia-
betes, screening should be considered
at the time of diagnosis and repeated at
2 and then 5 years (163) or if clinical
symptoms indicate, such as poor growth
or increased hypoglycemia (164,166).
Although celiac disease can be diag-
nosed more than 10 years after diabetes
diagnosis, there are insufﬁcient data after
5 years to determine the optimal screen-
ing frequency. Measurement of tTG anti-
body should be considered at other times
in individuals with symptoms suggestive of
celiac disease (163). Monitoring for symp-
toms should include an assessment of lin-
ear growth and weight gain (164,166). A
small bowel biopsy in antibody-positive
children is recommended to conﬁrm the
diagnosis (170). European guidelines on
screening for celiac disease in children (not
speciﬁc to children with type 1 diabetes)
suggest that biopsy may not be necessary
in symptomatic children with high anti-
body titers (i.e., greater than 10 times the
upper limit of normal) provided that fur-
ther testing is performed (veriﬁcation of
endomysial antibody positivity on a sepa-
rate blood sample) (171). Whether this
approach may be appropriate for asymp-
tomatic children in high-risk groups re-
mains an open question, though evidence
is emerging (172). It is also advisable to
check for celiac disease–associated HLA
types in individuals who are diagnosed
without a small intestinal biopsy. In symp-
tomatic children with type 1 diabetes and
conﬁrmed celiac disease, gluten-free diets
reduce symptoms and rates of hypoglyce-
mia (173). The challenging dietary restric-
tions associated with having both type 1
diabetes and celiac disease place a signiﬁ-
cant burden on individuals. Therefore, a
biopsy to conﬁrm the diagnosis ofceliac dis-
ease is recommended, especially in asymp-
tomatic children, before establishing a
diagnosisofceliac disease(171)andendors-
ing signiﬁcant dietary changes. A gluten-
free diet was beneﬁcial in asymptomatic
diabetesjournals.org/care
Children and Adolescents
S265
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

adults with positive antibodies conﬁrmed
by biopsy (174).
Management of Cardiovascular Risk
Factors
Hypertension Screening
Recommendation
14.33 Blood pressure should be mea-
sured at every routine visit. In youth
with high blood pressure (blood pres-
sure $90th percentile for age, sex,
and height or, in adolescents aged
$13 years, blood pressure $120/80
mmHg) on three separate measure-
ments, ambulatory blood pressure
monitoring should be strongly consid-
ered. B
Hypertension Treatment
Recommendations
14.34 Treatment of elevated blood
pressure (deﬁned as 90th to <95th
percentile for age, sex, and height
or, in adolescents aged $13 years,
120–129/<80 mmHg) is lifestyle mod-
iﬁcation focused on healthy nutrition,
physical activity, sleep, and, if appro-
priate, weight management. C
14.35 In addition to lifestyle modiﬁca-
tion, ACE inhibitors or angiotensin re-
ceptor blockers should be started for
treatment of conﬁrmed hypertension
(deﬁned as blood pressure consis-
tently $95th percentile for age, sex,
and height or, in adolescents aged
$13 years, $130/80 mmHg). Due to
the potential teratogenic effects, indi-
viduals of childbearing age should re-
ceive reproductive counseling, and
ACE inhibitors and angiotensin recep-
tor blockers should be avoided in in-
dividuals of childbearing age who are
not using reliable contraception. B
14.36 The goal of treatment is blood
pressure <90th percentile for age,
sex, and height or, in adolescents aged
$13 years, <130/80 mmHg. C
Blood pressure measurements should be
performed using the appropriate size cuff
with the youth seated and relaxed. Ele-
vated blood pressure should be conﬁrmed
on at least three separate days, and ambu-
latory blood pressure monitoring should
be considered. Evaluation should proceed
as clinically indicated (175,176). Treatment
is generally initiated with an ACE inhibitor,
but an angiotensin receptor blocker can be
used if the ACE inhibitor is not tolerated
(e.g., due to cough) (177).
Dyslipidemia Screening
Recommendations
14.37 Initial lipid proﬁle should be
performed soon after diagnosis, pref-
erably after glycemia has improved
and age is $2 years. If initial LDL cho-
lesterol is #100 mg/dL (#2.6 mmol/L),
subsequent testing should be per-
formed at 9–11 years of age. B Initial
testing may be done with a nonfast-
ing lipid level with conﬁrmatory test-
ing with a fasting lipid panel.
14.38 IfLDLcholesterolvaluesarewithin
the accepted risk level (<100 mg/dL
[<2.6 mmol/L]), a lipid proﬁle repeated
every 3 yearsisreasonable.E
Dyslipidemia Treatment
Recommendations
14.39 If lipids are abnormal, initial ther-
apy should consist of optimizing glyce-
mia and medical nutrition therapy to
limit the amount of calories from fat to
25–30% and saturated fat to <7%, limit
cholesterol to <200 mg/day, avoid
trans fats, and aim for 10% calories
from monounsaturated fats. A
14.40 After the age of 10 years, addi-
tion of a statin may be considered in
youth with type 1 diabetes who, de-
spite medical nutrition therapy and life-
style changes, continue to have LDL
cholesterol >160 mg/dL (>4.1 mmol/L)
or LDL cholesterol >130 mg/dL
(>3.4 mmol/L) and one or more car-
diovascular disease risk factors. E Due
to the potential teratogenic effects, in-
dividuals of childbearing age should re-
ceive reproductive counseling, and
statins should be avoided in individuals
of childbearing age who are not using
reliable contraception. B
14.41 The goal of therapy is an
LDL cholesterol value <100 mg/dL
(<2.6 mmol/L). E
Population-based studies estimate that
14–45% of children with type 1 diabetes
have two or more atherosclerotic cardio-
vascular disease
(ASCVD) risk
factors
(178–180), and the prevalence of cardio-
vascular disease (CVD) risk factors increase
with age (180) and among racial/ethnic mi-
norities (40), with girls having a higher risk
burden than boys (179).
Pathophysiology. The atherosclerotic pro-
cess begins in childhood, and although
ASCVD events are not expected to occur
during childhood, observations using a va-
riety of methodologies show that youth
with type 1 diabetes may have subclinical
CVD within the ﬁrst decade of diagnosis
(181–183). Studies of carotid intima media
thickness have yielded inconsistent results
(176,177).
Screening. Diabetes predisposes to the
development of accelerated arterioscle-
rosis. Lipid evaluation for these individu-
als contributes to risk assessment and
identiﬁes an important proportion of
those with dyslipidemia. Therefore, ini-
tial screening should be done soon after
diagnosis. If the initial screen is normal,
subsequent screening may be done at
9–11 years of age, which is a stable time
for lipid assessment in children (184).
Children with a primary lipid disorder
(e.g.,
familial
hyperlipidemia)
should
be referred to a lipid specialist. Non-HDL
cholesterol level has been identiﬁed as a
signiﬁcant predictor of the presence of ath-
erosclerosis—as powerful as any other li-
poprotein cholesterol measure in children
and adolescents. For both children and
adults, non-HDL cholesterol level seems
to be more predictive of persistent dyslipi-
demia and, therefore, atherosclerosis and
future events than total cholesterol, LDL
cholesterol, or HDL cholesterol levels
alone. A major advantage (185) of non-
HDL cholesterol is that it can be accurately
calculated in a nonfasting state and there-
fore is practical to obtain in clinical practice
as a screening test (186).Youth with type 1
diabetes have a high prevalence of lipid ab-
normalities (178,185).
Even if normal, screening should be re-
peated within 3 years, as A1C and other
cardiovascular risk factors can change
dramatically during adolescence (187).
Treatment. Pediatric lipid guidelines pro-
vide some guidance relevant to children
with type 1 diabetes and secondary dys-
lipidemia (176,184,188,189); however,
there are few studies on modifying lipid
levels in children with type 1 diabetes. A
6-month trial of dietary counseling pro-
duced a signiﬁcant improvement in lipid
levels (190); likewise, a lifestyle intervention
S266
Children and Adolescents
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

trial with 6 months of exercise in adoles-
cents demonstrated improvement in lipid
levels (191). Data from the SEARCH for Dia-
betes in Youth (SEARCH) study show that
improved glucose over a 2-year period is
associated with a more favorable lipid pro-
ﬁle; however, improved glycemia alone will
not normalize lipids in youth with type 1 di-
abetes and dyslipidemia (187).
Although intervention data are sparse,
the American Heart Association catego-
rizes children with type 1 diabetes in the
highest tier for cardiovascular risk and rec-
ommends both lifestyle and pharmaco-
logic treatment for those with elevated
LDL cholesterol levels (189,192). Initial
therapy should include a nutrition plan that
restricts saturated fat to 7% of total calories
and dietary cholesterol to 200 mg/day
(184). Data from randomized clinical trials
in children as young as 7 months of age
indicate that this diet is safe and does not
interfere with normal growth and develop-
ment (193).
Neither long-term safety nor cardio-
vascular outcome efﬁcacy of statin ther-
apy has been established for children;
however, studies have shown short-term
safety equivalent to that seen in adults
and efﬁcacy in lowering LDL cholesterol
levels in familial hypercholesterolemia or
severe hyperlipidemia, improving endo-
thelial function and causing regression of
carotid intimal thickening (194,195). Sta-
tins are not approved for children aged
<10 years, and statin treatment should
generally not be used in children with
type 1 diabetes before this age. Statins
are contraindicated in pregnancy; there-
fore, the prevention of unplanned preg-
nancies is of paramount importance.
Statins should be avoided in individuals
of childbearing age who are not using
reliable contraception (see Section 15,
“Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy,”
for more information). The multicenter,
randomized, placebo-controlled Adoles-
cent Type 1 Diabetes Cardio-Renal Inter-
vention Trial (AdDIT) provides safety data
on pharmacologic treatment with an ACE
inhibitor and statin in adolescents with
type 1 diabetes (176).
Microvascular Complications
Nephropathy Screening
Recommendation
14.42 Annual screening for albumin-
uria with a random (morning sample
preferred to avoid effects of exercise)
spot urine sample for albumin-to-
creatinine ratio should be considered
at puberty or at age >10 years, which-
ever is earlier, once the youth has had
diabetes for 5 years. B
Nephropathy Treatment
Recommendation
14.43 An ACE inhibitor or an angioten-
sin receptor blocker, titrated to normal-
ization of albumin excretion, may be
considered
when
elevated
urinary
albumin-to-creatinine ratio (>30 mg/g)
is documented (two of three urine
samples obtained over a 6-month in-
terval following efforts to improve gly-
cemia and normalize blood pressure). E
Due to the potential teratogenic ef-
fects, individuals of childbearing age
should receive reproductive counsel-
ing, and ACE inhibitors and angiotensin
receptor blockers should be avoided in
individuals of childbearing age who
are not using reliable contraception. B
Data from 7,549 participants <20 years of
age in the T1D Exchange clinic registry em-
phasize the importance of meeting glyce-
mic and blood pressure goals, particularly
as diabetes duration increases, in order to
reduce the risk of diabetic kidney disease.
The data also underscore the importance
of routine screening to ensure early diag-
nosis and timely treatment of albuminuria
(196). An estimation of glomerular ﬁltra-
tion rate (GFR), calculated using GFR
estimating equations from the serum cre-
atinine, height, age, and sex (197), should
be considered at baseline and repeated as
indicated based on clinical status, age, dia-
betes duration, and therapies. Improved
methods are needed to screen for early
GFR loss since estimated GFR is inaccurate
at GFR >60 mL/min/1.73 m2 (197,198).
The AdDITstudy in adolescents with type 1
diabetes demonstrated the safety of ACE
inhibitor treatment, but the treatment did
not change the albumin-to-creatinine ratio
over the course of the study (176).
Retinopathy
Recommendations
14.44 An initial dilated and compre-
hensive eye examination is recom-
mended once youth have had type 1
diabetes for 3–5 years, provided they
are aged $11 years or puberty has
started, whichever is earlier. B
14.45 After the initial examination,
repeat dilated
and
comprehensive
eye examination every 2 years. Less
frequent examinations, every 4 years,
may be acceptable on the advice of
an eye care professional and based
on risk factor assessment, including a
history of A1C <8%. B
14.46 Programs that use retinal pho-
tography (with remote reading or use
of a validated assessment tool) to im-
prove access to diabetic retinopathy
screening can be appropriate screening
strategies for diabetic retinopathy. Such
programs need to provide pathways for
timely referral for a comprehensive eye
examination when indicated. E
Retinopathy (like albuminuria) most com-
monly occurs after the onset of puberty
and after 5–10 years of diabetes duration
(199). It is currently recognized that there
is a low risk of development of vision-
threatening retinal lesions prior to 12 years
of age (200,201). A 2019 publication based
on the follow-up of the DCCT adolescent
cohort supports a lower frequency of eye
examinations than previously recom-
mended, particularly in adolescents with
A1C closer to the goal range (202,203).
Referrals should be made to eye care
professionals with expertise in diabetic
retinopathy and experience in counsel-
ing pediatric patients and families on the
importance of prevention, early detec-
tion, and intervention.
Neuropathy
Recommendation
14.47 Consider an annual comprehen-
sive foot exam at the start of puberty or
at age $10 years, whichever is earlier,
once the youth has had type 1 diabetes
for 5 years. The examination should in-
clude inspection, assessment of foot
pulses, pinprick, and 10-g monoﬁla-
ment sensation tests, testing of vibra-
tion sensation using a 128-Hz tuning
fork, and ankle reﬂex tests. B
Diabetic neuropathy rarely occurs in pre-
pubertal children or after only 1–2 years
of diabetes (199), although data suggest a
prevalence of distal peripheral neuropathy
of 7% in 1,734 youth with type 1 diabetes
and association with the presence of CVD
diabetesjournals.org/care
Children and Adolescents
S267
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

risk factors (204,205). A comprehensive
foot exam, including inspection, palpation
of dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial
pulses, and determination of propriocep-
tion, vibration, and monoﬁlament sensa-
tion, should be performed annually along
with an assessment of symptoms of neu-
ropathic pain (205). Foot inspection can
be performed at each visit to educate youth
regarding the importance of foot care (see
Section 12, “Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and
Foot Care”).
TYPE 2 DIABETES
For information on risk-based screening for
type 2 diabetes and prediabetes in youth,
please refer to Section 2, “Diagnosis and
Classiﬁcation of Diabetes.” For additional
support for these recommendations, see
the ADA position statement “Evaluation
and Management of Youth-Onset Type 2
Diabetes” (3).
The prevalence of type 2 diabetes in
youth has continued to increase over the
past 20 years (4). The CDC published pro-
jections for type 2 diabetes prevalence
using the SEARCH database; assuming a
2.3% annual increase, the prevalence in
those under 20 years of age will quadru-
ple in 40 years (206,207).
Evidence suggests that type 2 diabetes
in youth is different not only from type 1
diabetes but also from type 2 diabetes in
adults and has unique features, such as a
more rapidly progressive decline in b-cell
function and accelerated development of
diabetes complications (3,208). Long-term
follow-up data from the Treatment Op-
tions for Type 2 Diabetes in Adolescents
and Youth (TODAY) study showed that a
majority of individuals with type 2 diabe-
tes diagnosed as youth had microvascular
complications by young adulthood (209).
Type 2 diabetes disproportionately im-
pacts youth of ethnic and racial minorities
and can occur in complex psychosocial
and cultural environments, which may
make it difﬁcult to sustain healthy lifestyle
changes and self-management behaviors
(41,210–213). Additional risk factors asso-
ciated with type 2 diabetes in youth in-
clude adiposity, family history of diabetes,
female sex, and low socioeconomic status
(208).
As with type 1 diabetes, youth with
type 2 diabetes spend much of the day in
school. Therefore, close communication
with and the cooperation of school per-
sonnel are essential for optimal diabetes
management, safety, and maximal aca-
demic opportunities.
Screening and Diagnosis
Recommendations
14.48 Risk-based screening for predia-
betes and/or type 2 diabetes should
be considered after the onset of pu-
berty or $10 years of age, whichever
occurs earlier, in youth with over-
weight (BMI $85th percentile) or
obesity (BMI $95th percentile) and
who have one or more additional
risk factors for diabetes (see Table 2.5
for evidence grading of other risk
factors).
14.49 If screening is normal, repeat
screening at a minimum of 3-year in-
tervals, E or more frequently if BMI is
increasing. C
14.50 Fasting plasma glucose, 2-h
plasma glucose during a 75-g oral glu-
cose tolerance test, and A1C can be
used to test for prediabetes or diabe-
tes in children and adolescents. B
14.51 Children and adolescents with
overweight or obesity in whom the
diagnosis of type 2 diabetes is being
considered should have a panel of
pancreatic autoantibodies tested to
exclude the possibility of autoimmune
type 1 diabetes. B
In the last decade, the incidence and prev-
alence of type 2 diabetes in adolescents
has increased dramatically, especially in
racial and ethnic minority populations
(184,214). A few studies suggest oral glu-
cose tolerance tests or fasting plasma glu-
cose values as more suitable diagnostic
tests than A1C in the pediatric population,
especially among certain ethnicities (215),
although fasting glucose alone may over-
diagnose diabetes in children (216,217).
In addition, many of these studies do not
recognize that diabetes diagnostic criteria
are based on long-term health outcomes,
and validations are not currently available
in the pediatric population (218). An anal-
ysis of National Health and Nutrition Ex-
amination Survey (NHANES) data suggests
using A1C for screening of high-risk youth
(219).
The ADA acknowledges the limited
data supporting A1C for diagnosing type 2
diabetes in children and adolescents.
Although A1C is not recommended for
diagnosis of diabetes in children with
cystic ﬁbrosis or symptoms suggestive
of acute onset of type 1 diabetes, and
only A1C assays without interference
are appropriate for children with hemo-
globinopathies, the ADA continues to
recommend A1C for diagnosis of type 2
diabetes in this population (214,215).
Diagnostic Challenges
Given the current obesity epidemic, dis-
tinguishing between type 1 and type 2
diabetes in children can be difﬁcult.
Overweight and obesity are common in
children with type 1 diabetes (42), and
diabetes-associated autoantibodies and
ketosis may be present in pediatric indi-
viduals with clinical features of type 2
diabetes (including obesity and acanthosis
nigricans) (216). The presence of islet
autoantibodies has been associated with
faster progression to insulin deﬁciency
(216). At the onset, DKA occurs in 6% of
youth aged 10–19 years with type 2 diabe-
tes (220). Although uncommon, type 2 di-
abetes has been observed in prepubertal
children under the age of 10 years, and
thus it should be part of the differential in
children with suggestive symptoms (221).
Finally, obesity contributes to the develop-
ment of type 1 diabetes in some individu-
als (222), which further blurs the lines
between diabetes types. However, accu-
rate diagnosis is critical, as treatment
plans, educational approaches, dietary ad-
vice, and outcomes differ markedly be-
tween individuals with the two diagnoses.
The signiﬁcant diagnostic difﬁculties posed
by MODY are discussed in Section 2,
“Diagnosis and Classiﬁcation of Diabetes.”
In addition, there are rare and atypical dia-
betes cases that represent a challenge for
clinicians and researchers.
Management
Lifestyle Management
Recommendations
14.52 All youth with type 2 diabetes
and their families should receive com-
prehensive diabetes self-management
education and support that is speciﬁc
to youth with type 2 diabetes and is
culturally appropriate. B
14.53 Youth with overweight/obesity
and type 2 diabetes and their families
should be provided with developmen-
tally and culturally appropriate com-
prehensive lifestyle programs that are
integrated with diabetes management
to achieve at least a 7–10% decrease
in excess weight. C
S268
Children and Adolescents
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

14.54 Given the necessity of long-
term weight management for youth
with type 2 diabetes, lifestyle inter-
vention should be based on a chronic
care model and offered in the context
of diabetes care. E
14.55 Youth with prediabetes and
type 2 diabetes, like all children and
adolescents, should be encouraged
to participate in at least 60 min of
moderate to vigorous physical ac-
tivity daily (with muscle and bone
strength training at least 3 days/
week) B and to decrease sedentary
behavior. C
14.56 Nutrition for youth with predia-
betes and type 2 diabetes, like for all
children and adolescents, should focus
on healthy eating patterns that empha-
size consumption of nutrient-dense,
high-quality foods and decreased con-
sumption of calorie-dense, nutrient-
poor foods, particularly sugar-added
beverages. B
Glycemic Goals
Recommendations
14.57 Blood glucose monitoring
should be individualized, taking into
consideration the pharmacologic treat-
ment of the youth with type 2 diabe-
tes. E
14.58 Real-time CGM or intermittently
scanned CGM should be offered for
diabetes management in youth with
type 2 diabetes on multiple daily injec-
tions or insulin pumps who are capable
of using the device safely (either by
themselves or with a caregiver). The
choice of device should be made based
on an individual’s and family’s circum-
stances, desires, and needs. E
14.59 Glycemic status should be as-
sessed at least every 3 months. E
14.60 A reasonable A1C goal for most
children and adolescents with type 2 di-
abetes is <7% (<53 mmol/mol). More
stringent A1C goals (such as <6.5%
[<48 mmol/mol]) may be appropriate
for selected individuals if they can be
achieved without signiﬁcant hypoglyce-
mia or other adverse effects of treat-
ment. Appropriate individuals might
include those with a short duration of
diabetes and lesser degrees of b-cell
dysfunction and individuals treated
with lifestyle or metformin only who
achieve signiﬁcant weight improve-
ment. E
14.61 Less stringent A1C goals (such
as 7.5% [58 mmol/mol]) may be ap-
propriate if there is an increased risk
of hypoglycemia. E
14.62 A1C goals for individuals on in-
sulin should be individualized, taking
into account the relatively low rates of
hypoglycemia in youth-onset type 2
diabetes. E
Pharmacologic Management
Recommendations
14.63 Initiate pharmacologic therapy,
in addition to behavioral counseling
for healthful nutrition and physical ac-
tivity changes, at diagnosis of type 2
diabetes. A
14.64 In individuals with incidentally
diagnosed or metabolically stable dia-
betes (A1C <8.5% [<69 mmol/mol]
and asymptomatic), metformin is the
initial
pharmacologic
treatment
of
choice if renal function is normal. A
14.65 Youth with marked hyperglyce-
mia
(blood
glucose
$250
mg/dL
[$13.9 mmol/L], A1C $8.5% [$69
mmol/mol]) without acidosis at diag-
nosis
who
are
symptomatic
with
polyuria, polydipsia, nocturia, and/or
weight loss should be treated initially
with long-acting insulin while metfor-
min is initiated and titrated. B
14.66 In individuals with ketosis/ketoa-
cidosis, treatment with subcutaneous
or intravenous insulin should be initi-
ated to rapidly correct the hyperglyce-
mia and the metabolic derangement.
Once acidosis is resolved, metformin
should be initiated while subcutaneous
insulin therapy is continued. A
14.67 In individuals presenting with
severe hyperglycemia (blood glucose
$600 mg/dL [$33.3 mmol/L]), con-
sider assessment for hyperglycemic
hyperosmolar nonketotic syndrome. A
14.68 If glycemic goals are no longer
met with metformin (with or without
long-acting insulin), glucagon-like pep-
tide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist therapy
and/or empagliﬂozin should be consid-
ered in children 10 years of age or
older. A
14.69 When choosing glucose-lowering
or other medications for youth with
overweight or obesity and type 2
diabetes, consider medication-taking
behavior and the medications’ effect
on weight. E
14.70 For youth not meeting glycemic
goals, maximize noninsulin therapies
(metformin, a GLP-1 receptor agonist,
and
empagliﬂozin)
before
initiating
and/orintensifyinginsulin therapy plan.E
14.71 In individuals initially treated
with insulin and metformin and/or
other glucose lowering medications
who are meeting glucose goals based
on blood glucose monitoring or CGM,
insulin can be tapered over 2–6 weeks
by decreasing the insulin dose 10–30%
every few days. B
Treatment of youth-onset type 2 diabetes
should include lifestyle management, dia-
betes self-management education and
support, and pharmacologic treatment.
Initial treatment of youth with obesity
and diabetes must take into account that
diabetes type is often uncertain in the
ﬁrst few weeks of treatment due to
overlap in presentation and that a sub-
stantial percentage of youth with type 2
diabetes will present with clinically signif-
icant ketoacidosis (223). Therefore, initial
therapy should address the hyperglyce-
mia and associated metabolic derange-
ments irrespective of ultimate diabetes
type, with adjustment of therapy once
metabolic compensation has been estab-
lished and subsequent information, such
as islet autoantibody results, becomes
available. Figure 14.1 provides an ap-
proach to the initial treatment of new-
onset diabetes in youth with overweight
or obesity with clinical suspicion of type 2
diabetes.
Glycemic goals should be individual-
ized, taking into consideration the long-
term health beneﬁts of more stringent
goals and risk for adverse effects, such as
hypoglycemia. A lower A1C goal in youth
with type 2 diabetes when compared
with those recommended in type 1 diabe-
tes is justiﬁed by a lower riskof hypoglyce-
mia and higher risk of complications
(209,224–227).
Self-management in pediatric diabetes
involves both the youth and their parents/
adult caregivers. Individuals and their fam-
ilies should receive education and support
for healthful nutrition and physical activity,
such as a balanced meal plan, achieving
and maintaining a healthy weight, and reg-
ular physical activity. Youth with type 2
diabetesjournals.org/care
Children and Adolescents
S269
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

diabetes and comorbidities, including ne-
phropathy, should continue to have age-
appropriate protein intake (228). Physical
activity should include aerobic, muscle-
strengthening, and bone-strengthening
activities (33). A family-centered approach
to nutrition and lifestyle modiﬁcation is es-
sential in children and adolescents with
type 2 diabetes, and nutrition recommen-
dations should be culturally appropriate
and sensitive to family resources (see
Section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health
Behaviors and Well-being to Improve
Health Outcomes”). Given the complex
social and environmental context sur-
rounding youth with type 2 diabetes,
individual-level lifestyle interventions may
not be sufﬁcient to address the complex
interplay of family dynamics, behavioral
health, community readiness, and the
broader environmental system (3).
An interprofessional diabetes team, in-
cluding a physician, diabetes care and
education specialist, registered dietitian
nutritionist, and psychologist or social
worker, is essential. In addition to achiev-
ing glycemic goals and self-management
education (229–231), initial treatment
must include management of comorbid-
ities such as obesity, dyslipidemia, hyper-
tension, and microvascular complications.
Current pharmacologic treatment op-
tions for youth-onset type 2 diabetes are
limited to four approved drug classes: in-
sulin, metformin, glucagon-like peptide 1
(GLP-1) receptor agonists, and sodium–
glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors (speciﬁ-
cally empagliﬂozin). Presentation with ke-
toacidosis or marked ketosis requires a
period of insulin therapy until fasting and
postprandial glycemia have been restored
to normal or near-normal levels. Insulin
pump therapy may be considered as an
option for those on long-term multiple daily
injections who are able to safely manage
the device. Initial treatment should also be
with insulin when the distinction between
type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes is un-
clear and in individuals who have random
blood glucose concentrations $250 mg/dL
($13.9 mmol/L) and/or A1C $8.5%
($69 mmol/mol) (232). Metformin therapy
should be added after resolution of keto-
sis/ketoacidosis.
When initial insulin treatment is not
required, initiation of metformin is rec-
ommended. The TODAY study found that
metformin alone provided durable glyce-
mic control (A1C #8% [#64 mmol/mol]
for 6 months) in approximately half of
the subjects (233). The Restoring Insulin
Secretion (RISE) Consortium study did not
demonstrate differences in measures of
glucose or b-cell function preservation
between metformin and insulin, but there
was more weight gain with insulin (234).
To date, the TODAY study is the only
trial combining lifestyle and metformin
therapy in youth with type 2 diabetes; the
New-Onset Diabetes in Youth With Overweight or Obesity With Clinical Suspicion of Type 2 Diabetes
Initiate lifestyle management and diabetes education
A1C <8.5%
No acidosis or ketosis
A1C ≥8.5%
No acidosis with or without ketosis
Acidosis and/or DKA and/or HHNK
Metformin
 
 • Titrate up to 2,000 mg per day
 
  as tolerated
Metformin
 
 • Titrate up to 2,000 mg per day
 
  as tolerated
Long-acting insulin: start at 0.5 units/kg/day
 
and titrate every 2–3 days based on
 
BGM
Manage DKA or HHNK
i.v. insulin until acidosis resolves, then
 
subcutaneous, as for type 1 diabetes
 
until antibodies are known
Continue or start metformin
If on insulin, titrate guided by glucose values
Continue or initiate MDI insulin or pump therapy,
 
as for type 1 diabetes
Discontinue metformin
Continue metformin
Consider adding GLP-1 receptor agonist or SGLT2
 
 inhibitor approved for youth with type 2 diabetes
Titrate/initiate insulin therapy; if using long-acting insulin
 
only and glycemic goal not met with escalating
 
doses, then add prandial insulin; total daily insulin
 
dose may exceed 1 unit/kg/day 
Pancreatic autoantibodies
NEGATIVE
POSITIVE
A1C goals not met
Figure 14.1—Management of new-onset diabetes in youth with overweight or obesity with clinical suspicion of type 2 diabetes. A1C 8.5% = 69 mmol/mol.
Adapted from the ADA position statement “Evaluation and Management of Youth-Onset Type 2 Diabetes” (3). BGM, blood glucose monitoring; CGM, contin-
uous glucose monitoring; DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis; GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide 1; HHNK, hyperosmolar hyperglycemic nonketotic syndrome; i.v., intrave-
nous; MDI, multiple daily injections; SGLT2, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2.
S270
Children and Adolescents
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

combination did not perform better than
metformin alone in achieving durable gly-
cemic levels (233).
Randomized controlled trials in youth
have shown that GLP-1 receptor agonists
are safe and effective for decreasing A1C
(235–239). Use of GLP-1 receptor ago-
nists can increase the frequency of gas-
trointestinal side effects and should not
be used in individuals with a family his-
tory of medullary thyroid cancer.
In a recent multicenter double-blind, pla-
cebo-controlled trial,158 children with type 2
diabetes aged between 10 and 17 years
were randomized to 10 mg empagliﬂozin,
5 mg linagliptin, or placebo.There was a sig-
niﬁcant reduction in the primary outcome
(A1C): 0.84% from baseline in the empagli-
ﬂozin group compared with the placebo
group (P = 0.012).There were no episodes of
severehypoglycemiaduringthestudy(240).
Blood glucose monitoring plans should
be individualized,taking into consideration
the pharmacologic treatment of the per-
son. Although data on CGM in youth with
type 2 diabetes are sparse (241), CGM
could be considered in individuals requir-
ing frequent blood glucose monitoring for
diabetes management.
Metabolic Surgery
Recommendations
14.72 Metabolic surgery may be con-
sidered for the treatment of adoles-
cents with type 2 diabetes who have
class 2 obesity or higher (BMI >35
kg/m2 or 120% of 95th percentile for
age and sex, whichever is lower) and
who have elevated A1C and/or seri-
ous comorbidities despite lifestyle
and pharmacologic intervention. A
14.73 Metabolic surgery should be per-
formed only by an experienced surgeon
working as part of a well-organized and
engaged interprofessional team, includ-
ing a surgeon, endocrinologist, regis-
tered dietitian nutritionist, behavioral
health specialist, and nurse. A
The results of weight loss and lifestyle in-
terventions for obesity in children and ado-
lescents have been disappointing, and
treatment options as adjuncts to lifestyle
therapy are limited. Recent U.S. Food and
Drug Administration–approved medica-
tions for youth ages 12 and older include
phentermine and topiramate extended-
release capsules and GLP-1 receptor ago-
nists (242–245). Over the last decade,
weight loss surgery has been increasingly
performed in adolescents with obesity.
Small retrospectiveanalysesand a prospec-
tive multicenter, nonrandomized study sug-
gest that bariatric or metabolic surgery
have beneﬁts in adolescents with obesity
and type 2 diabetes similar to those
observed in adults. Teenagers experience
similar degrees of weight loss, diabetes re-
mission, and improvement of cardiometa-
bolic risk factors for at least 3 years after
surgery (246). A secondary data analysis
from the Teen-Longitudinal Assessment of
Bariatric Surgery (Teen-LABS) and TODAY
studies suggests surgical treatment of ado-
lescents with severe obesity and type 2 dia-
betes is associated with improved glycemia
(247); however, no randomized trials have
yet compared the effectiveness and safety
of surgery to those of conventional treat-
ment options in adolescents (248). The
guidelines used as an indication for met-
abolic surgery in adolescents generally
include class 2 obesity or higher (BMI
>35 kg/m2 or 120% of 95th percentile
forage and sex, whichever is lower, with co-
morbidities) or BMI >40 kg/m2 with or
without comorbidities (249–261). A num-
ber ofgroups, including the Pediatric Bariat-
ric Study Group and Teen-LABS study, have
demonstrated the effectiveness of meta-
bolic surgery in adolescents (253–259).
Prevention and Management of
Diabetes Complications
Hypertension
Recommendations
14.74 Blood pressure should be mea-
sured at every clinic visit. In youth
with high blood pressure (blood pres-
sure $90th percentile for age, sex,
and height or, in adolescents aged
$13 years, $120/80 mmHg) on three
separate measurements, ambulatory
blood pressure monitoring should be
strongly considered. B
14.75 Treatment of elevated blood
pressure (deﬁned as 90th to <95th
percentile for age, sex, and height or, in
adolescents aged $13 years, 120–129/
<80 mmHg) is lifestyle modiﬁcation fo-
cused on healthy nutrition, physical ac-
tivity, sleep, and, if appropriate, weight
management. C
14.76 In addition to lifestyle modiﬁca-
tion, ACE inhibitors or angiotensin re-
ceptor blockers should be started for
treatment of conﬁrmed hypertension
(deﬁned as blood pressure consistently
$95th percentile for age, sex, and
height
or,
in
adolescents
aged
$13 years, $130/80 mmHg). Due to
the potential teratogenic effects, indi-
viduals of childbearing age should re-
ceive reproductive counseling, and
ACE inhibitors and angiotensin recep-
tor blockers should be avoided in indi-
viduals of childbearing age who are
not using reliable contraception. B
14.77 The goal of treatment is blood
pressure <90th percentile for age, sex,
and height or, in adolescents aged
$13 years, <130/80 mmHg. C
Nephropathy
Recommendations
14.78 Protein intake should be at
the recommended daily allowance of
0.85–1.2 g/kg/day (according to age). E
14.79 Urine albumin-to-creatinine ra-
tio should be obtained at the time of
diagnosis and annually thereafter. An
elevated urine albumin-to-creatinine
ratio (>30 mg/g creatinine) should be
conﬁrmed on two of three samples. B
14.80 Estimated glomerular ﬁltration
rate (GFR) should be determined at
the time of diagnosis and annually
thereafter. E
14.81 In youth with diabetes and hy-
pertension, either an ACE inhibitor or
an angiotensin receptor blocker is rec-
ommended for those with modestly el-
evated urinary albumin-to-creatinine
ratio (30–299 mg/g creatinine) and
is strongly recommended for those
with urinary albumin-to-creatinine ra-
tio >300 mg/g creatinine and/or esti-
mated GFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2. E
Due to the potential teratogenic ef-
fects, individuals of childbearing age
should receive reproductive counsel-
ing, and ACE inhibitors and angiotensin
receptor blockers should be avoided in
individuals of childbearing age who are
not using reliable contraception. B
14.82 For youth with nephropathy,
continue monitoring (yearly and/or
as indicated by urinary albumin-to-
creatinine ratio and estimated GFR)
to detect disease progression. E
14.83 Referral to nephrology is rec-
ommended in case of uncertainty of
etiology, worsening urinary albumin-
to-creatinine ratio, or decrease in esti-
mated GFR. E
diabetesjournals.org/care
Children and Adolescents
S271
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Neuropathy
Recommendations
14.84 Youth with type 2 diabetes
should be screened for the presence of
neuropathy by foot examination at di-
agnosis and annually. The examination
should include inspection, assessment
of foot pulses, pinprick and 10-g mono-
ﬁlament sensation tests, testing of
vibration sensation using a 128-Hz tun-
ing fork, and ankle reﬂex tests. C
14.85 Prevention of neuropathy should
focus on achieving glycemic goals. C
Retinopathy
Recommendations
14.86 Screening for retinopathy should
be performed by dilated fundoscopy at
or soon after diagnosis and annually
thereafter. C
14.87 Optimizing glycemia is recom-
mended to decrease the risk or slow
the progression of retinopathy. B
14.88 Less frequent examination (every
2 years) may be considered if achiev-
ing glycemic goals and a normal eye
exam. C
14.89 Programs that use retinal pho-
tography (with remote reading or use
of a validated assessment tool) to im-
prove access to diabetic retinopathy
screening can be appropriate screening
strategies for diabetic retinopathy. Such
programs need to provide pathways for
timely referral for a comprehensive eye
examination when indicated. E
Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease
Recommendations
14.90 Evaluation of youth with type 2
diabetes for nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease (by measuring AST and ALT)
should be done at diagnosis and annu-
ally thereafter. B
14.91 Referral to gastroenterology
should be considered for persis-
tently elevated or worsening transa-
minases. B
Obstructive Sleep Apnea
Recommendation
14.92 Screening for symptoms of sleep
apnea should be done at each visit,
and referral to a pediatric sleep
specialist for evaluation and a polysom-
nogram, if indicated, is recommended.
Obstructive sleep apnea should be
treated when documented. B
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome
Recommendations
14.93 Evaluate for polycystic ovary
syndrome in female adolescents with
type 2 diabetes, including laboratory
studies, when indicated. B
14.94 Metformin, in addition to life-
style modiﬁcation, is likely to improve
the menstrual cyclicity and hyperan-
drogenism in female individuals with
type 2 diabetes. E
Cardiovascular Disease
Recommendation
14.95 Intensive lifestyle interventions
focusing on weight loss, dyslipidemia,
hypertension, and dysglycemia are
important to prevent overt macrovas-
cular disease in early adulthood. E
Dyslipidemia
Recommendations
14.96 Lipid screening should be per-
formed initially after optimizing gly-
cemia and annually thereafter. B
14.97 Optimal goals are LDL cholesterol
<100 mg/dL (<2.6 mmol/L), HDL cho-
lesterol >35 mg/dL (>0.91 mmol/L),
and
triglycerides
<150
mg/dL
(<1.7 mmol/L). E
14.98 If lipids are abnormal, initial ther-
apy should consist of optimizing glyce-
mia and medical nutritional therapy to
limit the amount of calories from fat to
25–30% and saturated fat to <7%, limit
cholesterol to <200 mg/day, avoid
trans fats, and aim for 10% calories
from monounsaturated fats for ele-
vated LDL. For elevated triglycerides,
medical nutrition therapy should also
focus on decreasing simple sugar intake
and increasing dietary n-3 fatty acids in
addition to the above changes. A
14.99
If LDL cholesterol remains
>130 mg/dL (>3.4 mmol/L) after
6 months of dietary intervention, initi-
ate therapy with statin, with a goal of
LDL <100 mg/dL (<2.6 mmol/L). Due
to the potential teratogenic effects,
individuals of childbearing age should
receive reproductive counseling, and
statins should be avoided in individu-
als of childbearing age who are not us-
ing reliable contraception. B
14.100 If triglycerides are >400 mg/dL
(>4.7 mmol/L) fasting or >1,000 mg/dL
(>11.6 mmol/L) nonfasting, optimize
glycemia and begin ﬁbrate, with a goal
of <400 mg/dL (<4.7 mmol/L) fasting
to reduce risk for pancreatitis. C
Cardiac Function Testing
Recommendation
14.101 Routine screening for heart
disease with electrocardiogram, echo-
cardiogram, or stress testing is not rec-
ommended in asymptomatic youth
with type 2 diabetes. B
Comorbidities may already be present
at the time of diagnosis of type 2 diabe-
tes in youth (208,262). Therefore, blood
pressure measurement, a fasting lipid
panel, assessment of random urine al-
bumin-to-creatinine ratio, and a dilated
eye examination should be performed
at diagnosis. Additional medical conditions
that may need to be addressed include
polycystic ovary disease and other comor-
bidities associated with pediatric obesity,
such as sleep apnea, hepatic steatosis, or-
thopedic complications, and psychosocial
concerns. The ADA position statement
“Evaluation and Management of Youth-
Onset Type 2 Diabetes” (3) provides guid-
ance on the prevention, screening, and
treatment of type 2 diabetes and its co-
morbidities in children and adolescents.
Youth-onset type 2 diabetes is associ-
ated with signiﬁcant microvascular and
macrovascular risk burden and a substan-
tial increase in the risk of cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality at an earlier age
than in those diagnosed later in life
(209,263). The higher complication risk in
earlier-onset type 2 diabetes is likely re-
lated to prolonged lifetime exposure to
hyperglycemia and other atherogenic risk
factors, including insulin resistance, dys-
lipidemia, hypertension, and chronic in-
ﬂammation. There is a low risk of
hypoglycemia in youth with type 2 dia-
betes, even if they are being treated
with insulin (264), and there are high
rates of complications (224–227). These
diabetes comorbidities also appear to
S272
Children and Adolescents
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

be higher than in youth with type 1 dia-
betes despite shorter diabetes duration
and lower A1C (262). In addition, the pro-
gression of vascular abnormalities ap-
pears to be more pronounced in youth-
onset type 2 diabetes than with type 1
diabetes of similar duration, including is-
chemic heart disease and stroke (263).
In youth with type 2 diabetes and
polycystic ovary syndrome, oral contra-
ceptives are appropriate agents.
Psychosocial Factors
Recommendations
14.102
Health
care
professionals
should screen for food insecurity, hous-
ing instability/homelessness, health lit-
eracy, ﬁnancial barriers, and social/
community support and apply that in-
formation to treatment decisions. E
14.103 Use age-appropriate standard-
ized and validated tools to screen for
diabetes distress, depressive symp-
toms, and behavioral health in youth
with type 2 diabetes, with attention
to symptoms of depression and disor-
dered eating, and refer to a qualiﬁed
behavioral health professional when
indicated. B
14.104 Starting at puberty, precon-
ception counseling should be incor-
porated into routine diabetes clinic
visits for all individuals of childbear-
ing potential because of the ad-
verse pregnancy outcomes in this
population. A
14.105 Adolescents and young adults
should be screened for tobacco/nico-
tine, electronic cigarettes, substance
use, and alcohol use at diagnosis and
regularly thereafter. C
Most youth with type 2 diabetes come
from racial/ethnic minority groups, have
low socioeconomic status, and often ex-
perience multiple psychosocial stressors
(41,56,212,213). Consideration of the
sociocultural context and efforts to per-
sonalize diabetes management are of
critical importance to minimize barriers
to care, enhance participation, and max-
imize response to treatment.
Evidence about psychiatric disorders
and symptoms in youth with type 2 dia-
betes is limited (265–269), but given the
sociocultural context for many youth and
the medical burden and obesity associ-
ated with type 2 diabetes, ongoing sur-
veillance of behavioral health is indicated.
Symptoms of depression and disordered
eating are common and associated with
higher A1C (53,266,270,271). Early detec-
tion of psychological and behavioral con-
cerns can facilitate effective treatment
options to improve psychosocial well-
being and support diabetes (56). When
psychological symptoms are identiﬁed,
referral to a behavioral health profes-
sional, ideally with experience in pediatric
diabetes, may be warranted. Although far
less research has been done on psycho-
logical and behavioral interventions for
youth with type 2 diabetes than for youth
with type 1 diabetes, behavioral profes-
sionals can provide behavioral health care
services to support youth with type 2 dia-
betes (61–63). Many of the medications
prescribed for diabetes and psychiatric
disorders are associated with weight gain
and can increase concerns about eating,
body shape, and weight (272,273).
The TODAY study documented high
rates of maternal complications during
pregnancy and low rates of preconcep-
tion counseling and contraception use
(274). Preconception counseling tailored
for adolescents with diabetes (including
type 2 diabetes) has sustained behav-
ioral beneﬁts (71).
SUBSTANCE USE IN PEDIATRIC
DIABETES
Tobacco and Electronic Cigarettes
Recommendations
14.106 Elicit a smoking history at ini-
tial and follow-up diabetes visits; dis-
courage smoking in youth who do
not smoke and encourage smoking
cessation in those who do smoke. A
14.107 Electronic cigarette use should
be discouraged. A
The adverse health effects of smoking and
use of tobacco products are well recog-
nized with respect to future cancer and
CVD risk. Despite this, smoking rates are
signiﬁcantly higher among youth with dia-
betes than among youth without diabetes
(275,276). In youth with diabetes, it is im-
portant to avoid additional CVD risk fac-
tors. Smoking increases the risk of the
onset of albuminuria; therefore, smoking
avoidance is important to prevent both
microvascular and macrovascular compli-
cations (184,277). Discouraging use of
tobacco products, including electronic cig-
arettes (278,279), is an important part of
routine diabetes care. Individuals with dia-
betes should be advised to avoid vaping
and using electronic cigarettes, either as a
way to stop smoking tobacco or as a recre-
ational drug. In younger children, it is im-
portant to assess exposure to cigarette
smoke in the home because of the ad-
verse effects of secondhand smoke and
to discourage youth from ever smoking.
See Section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health
Behaviors and Well-being to Improve
Health Outcomes,” for more information
about smoking, tobacco, and electronic
cigarettes in people with diabetes.
As alcohol use has implications for
glycemic management and safety in
youth and young adults with diabetes,
efforts are warranted to reduce alcohol
use and increase education about the
risks of alcohol use and strategies to
minimize risks. A psychoeducational in-
tervention for adolescents with chronic
medical conditions, including type 1 dia-
betes, has demonstrated beneﬁts for
knowledge, perceived beneﬁts, and re-
duced use (280).
TRANSITION FROM PEDIATRIC TO
ADULT CARE
Recommendations
14.108 Pediatric diabetes care teams
should implement transition prepara-
tion programs for youth beginning in
early adolescence and, at the latest,
at least 1 year before the anticipated
transfer from pediatric to adult health
care. E
14.109 Interprofessional adult and pe-
diatric health care teamsshould provide
support and resources for adolescents,
young adults, and their families prior to
and during the transition process from
pediatric to adult health care. E
14.110 Pediatric diabetes specialists
should partner with youth with diabe-
tes and their caregivers to decide on
the timing of transfer to an adult dia-
betes specialist. E
Care and close supervision of diabetes
management are increasingly shifted from
parents and other adults to the youth with
type 1 or type 2 diabetesthroughout child-
hood and adolescence. The shift from pe-
diatric to adult health care professionals,
however, often occurs abruptly as the
older teen enters the next developmental
stage, referred to as emerging adulthood
diabetesjournals.org/care
Children and Adolescents
S273
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

(281), which is a critical period for young
people who have diabetes. During this pe-
riod of major life transitions, youth may
begin to move out of their parents’ or
caregivers’ homes and become increas-
ingly responsible for their diabetes care.
Their new responsibilities include self-
management of their diabetes, making
medical
appointments,
and
ﬁnancing
health care once they are no longer cov-
ered by their parents’ health insurance
plans (ongoing coverage until age 26 years
is currently available under provisions of
the U.S. Affordable Care Act). In addition
to lapses in health care, this is also a period
associated with deterioration in glycemic
stability; increased occurrence of acute
complications; psychosocial, emotional,
and behavioral challenges; and the emer-
gence of chronic complications (282–287).
The transfer period from pediatric to adult
care is prone to fragmentation in health
care delivery, which may adversely impact
health care quality, cost, and outcomes
(288). Worsening diabetes health out-
comes during the transition to adult care
and early adulthood have been docu-
mented (289,290).
It is clear that comprehensive and co-
ordinated planning that begins in early
adolescence is necessary to facilitate a
seamless transition from pediatric to
adult health care (282,283,291,292). Re-
search on effective interventions to pro-
mote successful transition to adult care
is limited, although there are promising
developments that may improve atten-
dance at follow-up appointments and
lower hospitalizations (293). Use of transi-
tion coordinators, technology to support
communication with young adults, and
other interventions may be useful in ad-
dressing the identiﬁed needs and preferen-
ces of young adults for transition (294) and
in supporting successful establishment in
adult care settings (295–300). Given the be-
havioral, psychosocial, and developmental
factors that relate to this transition, diabe-
tes care teams addressing transition should
include physicians, certiﬁed diabetes care
and education specialists, nurses, behav-
ioral health professionals, nutritionists, and
social workers (61,301). Resources to en-
hancesocial/peersupportduringthetransi-
tion process may also be valuable (302).
A comprehensive discussion regarding the
challenges faced during this period, includ-
ing speciﬁc recommendations, is found in
the ADA position statement “Diabetes Care
for Emerging Adults: Recommendations for
Transition From Pediatric to Adult Diabetes
Care Systems” (283).
The Endocrine Society, in collabora-
tion with the ADA and other organiza-
tions, has developed transition tools for
clinicians and youth and families (292).
References
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Vaccines Site: Healthcare Providers/Professionals,
2021. Accessed 21 August 2023. Available from
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/index.html.
2. Chiang JL, Maahs DM, Garvey KC, et al.Type 1
diabetes in children and adolescents: a position
statement by the American Diabetes Association.
Diabetes Care 2018;41:2026–2044
3. Arslanian S, Bacha F, Grey M, Marcus MD,
White NH, Zeitler P. Evaluation and management of
youth-onset type 2 diabetes: a position statement
by the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes
Care 2018;41:2648–2668
4. Lawrence JM, Divers J, Isom S, et al.; SEARCH
for Diabetes in Youth Study Group. Trends in
prevalence of type 1 and type 2 diabetes in
children and adolescents in the US, 2001-2017.
JAMA 2021;326:717–727
5. Thomas NJ, Jones SE, Weedon MN, Shields
BM, Oram RA, Hattersley AT. Frequency and
phenotype of type 1 diabetes in the ﬁrst six
decades of life: a cross-sectional, genetically
stratiﬁed survival analysis from UK Biobank.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2018;6:122–129
6. Barnea-Goraly N, Raman M, Mazaika P, et al.;
Diabetes Research in Children Network (DirecNet).
Alterations in white matter structure in young
children with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2014;
37:332–340
7. Cameron FJ, Scratch SE, Nadebaum C, et al.;
DKA Brain Injury Study Group. Neurological
consequences of diabetic ketoacidosis at initial
presentation of type 1 diabetes in a prospective
cohort study of children. Diabetes Care 2014;
37:1554–1562
8. Markowitz JT, Garvey KC, Laffel LM. Deve-
lopmental changes in the roles of patients and
families in type 1 diabetes management. Curr
Diabetes Rev 2015;11:231–238
9. Driscoll KA, Volkening LK, Haro H, et al. Are
children with type 1 diabetes safe at school?
Examining parent perceptions. Pediatr Diabetes
2015;16:613–620
10. Jackson CC, Albanese-O’Neill A, Butler KL,
et al. Diabetes care in the school setting: a
position statement of the American Diabetes
Association. Diabetes Care 2015;38:1958–1963
11. Mehta SN, Volkening LK, Anderson BJ, et al.;
Family Management of Childhood Diabetes
Study Steering Committee. Dietary behaviors
predict glycemic control in youth with type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2008;31:1318–1320
12. Bell KJ, Smart CE, Steil GM, Brand-Miller JC,
King B, Wolpert HA. Impact of fat, protein, and
glycemic index on postprandial glucose control in
type 1 diabetes: implications for intensive diabetes
management in the continuous glucose monitoring
era. Diabetes Care 2015;38:1008–1015
13. Smith TA, Marlow AA, King BR, Smart CE.
Insulin strategies for dietary fat and protein in
type 1 diabetes: a systematic review. Diabet Med
2021;38:e14641
14. Paterson MA, Smart CEM, Lopez PE, et al.
Increasing the protein quantity in a meal results in
dose-dependent effects on postprandial glucose
levels in individuals with type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Diabet Med 2017;34:851–854
15. Paterson MA, King BR, Smart CEM, Smith T,
Rafferty J, Lopez PE. Impact of dietary protein
on postprandial glycaemic control and insulin
requirements in type 1 diabetes: a systematic
review. Diabet Med 2019;36:1585–1599
16. Reddy M, Jugnee N, El Laboudi A, Spanudakis
E, Anantharaja S, Oliver N. A randomized controlled
pilot study of continuous glucose monitoring and
ﬂash glucose monitoring in people with Type 1
diabetes
and
impaired
awareness
of
hypo-
glycaemia. Diabet Med 2018;35:483–490
17. Smith TA, Blowes AA, King BR, Howley PP,
Smart CE. Families’ reports of problematic foods,
management strategies and continuous glucose
monitoring in type 1 diabetes: a cross-sectional
study. Nutr Diet 2021;78:449–457
18. Bao J, Gilbertson HR, Gray R, et al. Improving
the estimation of mealtime insulin dose in adults
with type 1 diabetes: the Normal Insulin Demand
for Dose Adjustment (NIDDA) study. Diabetes
Care 2011;34:2146–2151
19. Kordonouri O, Hartmann R, Remus K, Bl€asig
S, Sadeghian E, Danne T. Beneﬁt of supplementary
fat plus protein counting as compared with
conventional carbohydrate counting for insulin
bolus calculation in children with pump therapy.
Pediatr Diabetes 2012;13:540–544
20. Lundgren M, Sahlin Å, Svensson C, et al.;
DiPiS study group. Reduced morbidity at diagnosis
and improved glycemic control in children pre-
viously enrolled in DiPiS follow-up. Pediatr Dia-
betes 2014;15:494–501
21. Bell KJ, Gray R, Munns D, et al. Clinical
application of the food insulin index for mealtime
insulin dosing in adults with type 1 diabetes: a
randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Technol
Ther 2016;18:218–225
22. Bell KJ, Gray R, Munns D, et al. Estimating
insulin demand for protein-containing foods
using the food insulin index. Eur J Clin Nutr
2014;68:1055–1059
23. Lopez PE, Evans M, King BR, et al. A
randomized comparison of three prandial insulin
dosing algorithms for children and adolescents with
type 1 diabetes. Diabet Med 2018;35:1440–1447
24. Paterson MA, Smart CE, Lopez PE, et al.
Inﬂuence of dietary protein on postprandial
blood glucose levels in individuals with type 1
diabetes mellitus using intensive insulin therapy.
Diabet Med 2016;33:592–598
25. Furthner D, Lukas A, Schneider AM, et al.
The role of protein and fat intake on insulin
therapy in glycaemic control of paediatric type 1
diabetes: a systematic review and research gaps.
Nutrients 2021;13:3558
26. Smith TA, Smart CE, Fuery MEJ, et al. In
children and young people with type 1 diabetes
using pump therapy, an additional 40% of the
insulin dose for a high-fat, high-protein breakfast
improves postprandial glycaemic excursions: a
cross-over trial. Diabet Med 2021;38:e14511
27. Smith TA, Smart CE, Howley PP, Lopez PE,
King BR. For a high fat, high protein breakfast,
preprandial administration of 125% of the insulin
dose improves postprandial glycaemic excursions
S274
Children and Adolescents
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

in people with type 1 diabetes using multiple
daily injections: a cross-over trial. Diabet Med
2021;38:e14512
28. Kaya N, Kurtoglu S, G€okmen €Ozel H. Does
meal-time insulin dosing based on fat-protein
counting give positive results in postprandial
glycaemic proﬁle after a high protein-fat meal in
adolescents with type 1 diabetes: a randomised
controlled trial. J Hum Nutr Diet 2020;33:396–
403
29. Absil H, Baudet L, Robert A, Lysy PA. Beneﬁts
of physical activity in children and adolescents
with type 1 diabetes: a systematic review. Dia-
betes Res Clin Pract 2019;156:107810
30. Riddell MC, Gallen IW, Smart CE, et al.
Exercise management in type 1 diabetes: a
consensus statement. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
2017;5:377–390
31. Colberg SR, Sigal RJ, Yardley JE, et al. Physical
activity/exercise and diabetes: a position statement
of the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes
Care 2016;39:2065–2079
32. Moser O, Riddell MC, Eckstein ML, et al.
Glucose management for exercise using continuous
glucose monitoring (CGM) and intermittently
scanned CGM (isCGM) systems in type 1 diabetes:
position statement of the European Association for
the Study of Diabetes (EASD) and of the Inter-
national Society for Pediatric and Adolescent
Diabetes (ISPAD) endorsed by JDRF and supported
by the American Diabetes Association (ADA). Dia-
betologia 2020;63:2501–2520
33. U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans.
Accessed 23 August 2023. Available from https://
health.gov/our-work/nutrition-physical-activity/
physical-activity-guidelines
34. Tsalikian E, Kollman C, Tamborlane WB, et al.;
Diabetes Research in Children Network (DirecNet)
Study Group. Prevention of hypoglycemia during
exercise in children with type 1 diabetes by
suspending basal insulin. Diabetes Care 2006;
29:2200–2204
35. Taplin CE, Cobry E, Messer L, McFann K,
Chase HP, Fiallo-Scharer R. Preventing post-
exercise nocturnal hypoglycemia in children with
type 1 diabetes. J Pediatr 2010;157:784–788.e1
36. Eckstein ML, Weilguni B, Tauschmann M,
et al. Time in range for closed-loop systems
versus standard of care during physical exercise
in people with type 1 diabetes: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Clin Med 2021;10:10
37. Francescato MP, Stel G, Stenner E, Geat M.
Prolonged exercise in type 1 diabetes: performance
of a customizable algorithm to estimate the
carbohydrate supplements to minimize glycemic
imbalances. PLoS One 2015;10:e0125220
38. Baker LB, Rollo I, Stein KW, Jeukendrup AE.
Acute effects of carbohydrate supplementation
on intermittent sports performance. Nutrients
2015;7:5733–5763
39. Adolfsson P, Mattsson S, Jendle J. Evaluation
of glucose control when a new strategy of
increased carbohydrate supply is implemented
during prolonged physical exercise in type 1
diabetes. Eur J Appl Physiol 2015;115:2599–2607
40. Redondo MJ, Libman I, Cheng P, et al.; Pediatric
Diabetes Consortium. Racial/ethnic minority youth
with recent-onset type 1 diabetes have poor
prognostic factors. Diabetes Care 2018;41:1017–
1024
41. Liu LL, Lawrence JM, Davis C, et al.; SEARCH
for Diabetes in Youth Study Group. Prevalence of
overweight and obesity in youth with diabetes in
USA: the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study.
Pediatr Diabetes 2010;11:4–11
42. DuBose SN, Hermann JM, Tamborlane WV,
et al. Obesity in youth with type 1 diabetes in
Germany, Austria, and the United States. J
Pediatr 2015;167:627–632.e1–4
43. Corbin KD, Driscoll KA, Pratley RE, Smith SR,
Maahs DM; Advancing Care for Type 1 Diabetes
and Obesity Network (ACT1ON). Obesity in type 1
diabetes: pathophysiology, clinical impact, and
mechanisms. Endocr Rev 2018;39:629–663
44. Redondo MJ, Foster NC, Libman IM, et al.
Prevalence of cardiovascular risk factors in youth
with type 1 diabetes and elevated body mass
index. Acta Diabetol 2016;53:271–277
45. American Association of Diabetes Educators.
Management of children with diabetes in the
school setting. Diabetes Educ 2000;26:32–35
46. March C, Serman J, Bannuru RR, et al. Care
of young children with diabetes in the childcare
and community setting: a statement of the
American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care
2023;46:2102–2111
47. Hood KK, Beavers DP, Yi-Frazier J, et al.
Psychosocial burden and glycemic control during
the ﬁrst 6 years of diabetes: results from the
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study. J Adolesc
Health 2014;55:498–504
48. Hagger V, Hendrieckx C, Sturt J, Skinner TC,
Speight J. Diabetes distress among adolescents
with type 1 diabetes: a systematic review. Curr
Diab Rep 2016;16:9
49. Anderson BJ, Laffel LM, Domenger C, et al.
Factors associated with diabetes-speciﬁc health-
related quality of life in youth with type 1
diabetes: the Global TEENs Study. Diabetes Care
2017;40:1002–1009
50. Hilliard ME, De Wit M,Wasserman RM, et al.
Screening and support for emotional burdens
of youth with type 1 diabetes: strategies for
diabetes care providers. Pediatr Diabetes 2018;
19:534–543
51. Iturralde E, Rausch JR, Weissberg-Benchell J,
Hood KK. Diabetes-related emotional distress
over time. Pediatrics 2019;143:e20183011
52. Hill-Briggs F, Adler NE, Berkowitz SA, et al.
Social determinants of health and diabetes: a
scientiﬁc review. Diabetes Care 2020;44:258–
279
53. Monaghan M, Mara CA, Kichler JC, et al.
Multisite examination of depression screening
scores and correlates among adolescents and
young adults with type 2 diabetes. Can J Diabetes
2021;45:411–416
54. Mulvaney SA, Mara CA, Kichler JC, et al. A
retrospective multisite examination of depression
screening practices, scores, and correlates in
pediatric diabetes care. Transl Behav Med 2021;
11:122–131
55. Rechenberg K, Koerner R. Cognitive behavioral
therapy in adolescents with type 1 diabetes: an
integrative review. J Pediatr Nurs 2021;60:190–197
56. Young-Hyman D, de Groot M, Hill-Briggs F,
Gonzalez JS, Hood K, Peyrot M. Psychosocial care
for people with diabetes: a position statement of
the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes
Care 2016;39:2126–2140
57. Evans MA, Weil LEG, Shapiro JB, et al.
Psychometric properties of the parent and child
problem areas in diabetes measures. J Pediatr
Psychol 2019;44:703–713
58. Corathers SD, Kichler J, Jones NH, et al.
Improving depression screening for adolescents
with type 1 diabetes. Pediatrics 2013;132:e1395–
e1402
59. Pursey KM, Hart M, Jenkins L, McEvoy M,
Smart CE. Screening and identiﬁcation of dis-
ordered eating in people with type 1 diabetes: a
systematic review. J Diabetes Complications 2020;
34:107522
60. Inverso H, Moore HR, Lupini F, et al.
Mindfulness-based interventions: focus on pediatric
type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Curr Diab Rep 2022;22:
493–500
61. Kichler JC, Harris MA, Weissberg-Benchell J.
Contemporary roles of the pediatric psychologist
in diabetes care. Curr Diabetes Rev 2015;11:
210–221
62. Winkley K, Upsher R, Stahl D, et al.
Psychological interventions to improve self-
management of type 1 and type 2 diabetes: a
systematic review. Health Technol Assess 2020;
24:1–232
63. Hilliard ME, Powell PW, Anderson BJ.
Evidence-based behavioral interventions to
promote diabetes management in children,
adolescents, and families. Am Psychol 2016;71:
590–601
64. Katz ML,Volkening LK, Butler DA, Anderson BJ,
Laffel LM. Family-based psychoeducation and Care
Ambassador intervention to improve glycemic
control in youth with type 1 diabetes: a randomized
trial. Pediatr Diabetes 2014;15:142–150
65. Laffel LM, Vangsness L, Connell A, Goebel-
Fabbri A, Butler D, Anderson BJ. Impact of
ambulatory, family-focused teamwork intervention
on glycemic control in youth with type 1 diabetes.
J Pediatr 2003;142:409–416
66. Anderson BJ, Vangsness L, Connell A, Butler
D, Goebel-Fabbri A, Laffel LM. Family conﬂict,
adherence, and glycaemic control in youth with
short duration Type 1 diabetes. Diabet Med
2002;19:635–642
67. Helgeson VS, Palladino DK. Implications of
psychosocial
factors
for
diabetes
outcomes
among children with type 1 diabetes: a review.
Soc Personal Psychol Compass 2012;6:228–242
68. Kucera M, Sullivan AL. The educational
implications of type I diabetes mellitus: a review
of research and recommendations for school
psychological practice. Psychol Sch 2011;48:
587–603
69. Kuther TL. Medical decision-making and
minors: issues of consent and assent. Adolescence
2003;38:343–358
70. Coleman DL, Rosoff PM. The legal authority
of mature minors to consent to general medical
treatment. Pediatrics 2013;131:786–793
71. Charron-Prochownik D, Sereika SM, Becker
D, et al. Long-term effects of the booster-
enhanced READY-Girls preconception counseling
program on intentions and behaviors for family
planning in teens with diabetes. Diabetes Care
2013;36:3870–3874
72. American Diabetes Association. Diabetes and
Reproductive Health for Girls. 2016. Accessed 1
October 2023. Available from https://diabetes.org/
sites/default/ﬁles/2021-06/16_ready_girls_book_
proof_4.15.16%5B1%5D.pdf
73. Wisting L, Frøisland DH, Skrivarhaug T,
Dahl-Jørgensen K, Rø O. Disturbed eating
diabetesjournals.org/care
Children and Adolescents
S275
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

behavior and omission of insulin in adolescents
receiving intensiﬁed insulin treatment: a nationwide
population-based study. Diabetes Care 2013;36:
3382–3387
74. Goebel-Fabbri AE. Disturbed eating behaviors
and eating disorders in type 1 diabetes: clinical
signiﬁcance and treatment recommendations.
Curr Diab Rep 2009;9:133–139
75. Atik Altõnok Y, €Ozg€ur S, Meseri R, €Ozen S,
Darcan S¸, G€oks¸en D. Reliability and validity of
the diabetes eating problem survey in turkish
children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes
mellitus. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol 2017;9:
323–328
76. Saßmann H, Albrecht C, Busse-Widmann P,
et al. Psychometric properties of the German
version of the Diabetes Eating Problem Survey-
Revised: additional beneﬁt of disease-speciﬁc
screening in adolescents with type 1 diabetes.
Diabet Med 2015;32:1641–1647
77. Gerhardsson P, Schwandt A, Witsch M, et al.
The SWEET project 10-year benchmarking in
19 countries worldwide is associated with improved
HbA1c and increased use of diabetes technology in
youth with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther
2021;23:491–499
78. Cameron FJ, de Beaufort C, Aanstoot HJ,
et al.; Hvidoere International Study Group.
Lessons from the Hvidoere International Study
Group on childhood diabetes: be dogmatic about
outcome and ﬂexible in approach. Pediatr Dia-
betes 2013;14:473–480
79. Miller KM, Beck RW, Foster NC, Maahs DM.
HbA1c levels in type 1 diabetes from early
childhood to older adults: a deeper dive into the
inﬂuence of technology and socioeconomic
status on HbA1c in the T1D Exchange Clinic
Registry ﬁndings. Diabetes Technol Ther 2020;22:
645–650
80. Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
Research Group. Effect of intensive diabetes
treatment on the development and progression
of long-term complications in adolescents with
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: Diabetes
Control and Complications Trial. J Pediatr 1994;
125:177–188
81. White NH, Cleary PA, Dahms W, Goldstein D,
Malone J; Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
(DCCT)/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions
and Complications (EDIC) Research Group.
Beneﬁcial effects of intensive therapy of diabetes
during adolescence: outcomes after the conclusion
of the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
(DCCT). J Pediatr 2001;139:804–812
82. Samuelsson U, Steineck I, Gubbjornsdottir S.
A high mean-HbA1c value 3-15months after
diagnosis of type 1 diabetes in childhood is
related to metabolic control, macroalbuminuria,
and retinopathy in early adulthood—a pilot study
using two nation-wide population based quality
registries. Pediatr Diabetes 2014;15:229–235
83. Carlsen S, Skrivarhaug T, Thue G, et al.
Glycemic control and complications in patients
with type 1 diabetes—a registry-based longitudinal
study of adolescents and young adults. Pediatr
Diabetes 2017;18:188–195
84. Genuth SM, Backlund JY, Bayless M, et al.;
DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Effects of prior
intensive versus conventional therapy and history
of glycemia on cardiac function in type 1 diabetes
in the DCCT/EDIC. Diabetes 2013;62:3561–3569
85. Writing Team for the Diabetes Control and
Complications
Trial/Epidemiology
of
Diabetes
Interventions and Complications Research Group.
Sustained effect of intensive treatment of type 1
diabetes mellitus on development and progression
of diabetic nephropathy: the Epidemiology of
Diabetes Interventions and Complications (EDIC)
study. JAMA 2003;290:2159–2167
86. Gubitosi-Klug RA, Sun W, Cleary PA, et al.;
Writing Team for the DCCT/EDIC Research Group.
Effects of prior intensive insulin therapy and risk
factors
on
patient-reported
visual
function
outcomes in the Diabetes Control and Com-
plications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes Inter-
ventions and Complications (DCCT/EDIC) cohort.
JAMA Ophthalmol 2016;134:137–145
87. Orchard TJ, Nathan DM, Zinman B, et al.;
Writing Group for the DCCT/EDIC Research
Group. Association between 7 years of intensive
treatment of type 1 diabetes and long-term
mortality. JAMA 2015;313:45–53
88. Foland-Ross LC, Reiss AL, Mazaika PK, et al.;
Diabetes Research in Children Network (DirecNet).
Longitudinal assessment of hippocampus structure
in children with type 1 diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes
2018;19:1116–1123
89. Mauras N, Mazaika P, Buckingham B, et al.;
Diabetes Research in Children Network (DirecNet).
Longitudinal assessment of neuroanatomical and
cognitive differences in young children with type 1
diabetes: association with hyperglycemia. Diabetes
2015;64:1770–1779
90. Foland-Ross LC, Tong G, Mauras N, et al.;
Diabetes Research in Children Network (DirecNet).
Brain function differences in children with type 1
diabetes: a functional MRI study of working
memory. Diabetes 2020;69:1770–1778
91. Pourabbasi A, Tehrani-Doost M, Qavam SE,
Arzaghi SM, Larijani B. Association of diabetes
mellitus and structural changes in the central
nervous system in children and adolescents: a
systematic review. J Diabetes Metab Disord
2017;16:10
92. Perantie DC, Wu J, Koller JM, et al. Regional
brain volume differences associated with hyper-
glycemia and severe hypoglycemia in youth with
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2007;30:2331–
2337
93. Arbelaez AM, Semenkovich K, Hershey T.
Glycemic extremes in youth with T1DM: the
structural and functional integrity of the developing
brain. Pediatr Diabetes 2013;14:541–553
94. Broadley MM, White MJ, Andrew B. A
systematic review and meta-analysis of executive
function performance in type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Psychosom Med 2017;79:684–696
95. Ryan CM. Why is cognitive dysfunction
associated with the development of diabetes
early in life? The diathesis hypothesis. Pediatr
Diabetes 2006;7:289–297
96. Mauras N, Buckingham B, White NH, et al.;
Diabetes Research in Children Network (DirecNet).
Impact of type 1 diabetes in the developing brain
in children: a longitudinal study. Diabetes Care
2021;44:983–992
97. Campbell MS, Schatz DA, Chen V, et al.; T1D
Exchange Clinic Network. A contrast between
children and adolescents with excellent and poor
control: the T1D Exchange clinic registry experience.
Pediatr Diabetes 2014;15:110–117
98. Brown SA, Kovatchev BP, Raghinaru D, et al.;
iDCL Trial Research Group. Six-month randomized,
multicenter trial of closed-loop control in type 1
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;381:1707–1717
99. Bergenstal RM, Nimri R, Beck RW, et al.;
FLAIR Study Group. A comparison of two hybrid
closed-loop systems in adolescents and young
adults with type 1 diabetes (FLAIR): a multicentre,
randomised, crossover trial. Lancet 2021;397:
208–219
100. Breton MD, Kanapka LG, Beck RW, et al.;
iDCL Trial Research Group. A randomized trial of
closed-loop control in children with type 1
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2020;383:836–845
101. Dorando E, Haak T, Pieper D. Correction:
Continuous glucose monitoring for glycemic
control in children and adolescents diagnosed
with diabetes type 1: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes
2022;130:e1–e3
102. Brown SA, Forlenza GP, Bode BW, et al.;
Omnipod 5 Research Group. Multicenter trial of a
tubeless, on-body automated insulin delivery
system with customizable glycemic targets in
pediatric and adult participants with type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2021;44:1630–1640
103. Carlson AL, Sherr JL, Shulman DI, et al.
Safety
and
glycemic
outcomes
during
the
MiniMed advanced hybrid closed-loop system
pivotal trial in adolescents and adults with type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:178–
189
104. Prahalad P, Ding VY, Zaharieva DP, et al.
Teamwork, targets, technology, and tight control in
newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes: the Pilot 4T
study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2022;107:998–1008
105. Champakanath A, Akturk HK, Alonso GT,
Snell-Bergeon JK, Shah VN. Continuous glucose
monitoring initiation within ﬁrst year of type 1
diabetes diagnosis is associated with improved
glycemic outcomes: 7-year follow-up study. Dia-
betes Care 2022;45:750–753
106. Johnson SR, Holmes-Walker DJ, Chee M,
et al.; ADDN Study Group. Universal subsidized
continuous glucose monitoring funding for young
people with type 1 diabetes: uptake and outcomes
over 2 years, a population-based study. Diabetes
Care 2022;45:391–397
107. Rose S, Styles SE, Wiltshire EJ, et al. Use
of intermittently scanned continuous glucose
monitoring in young people with high-risk type 1
diabetes—extension phase outcomes following a
6-month randomized control trial. Diabet Med
2022;39:e14756
108. Beato-Vıbora
PI,
Gallego-Gamero
F,
Ambrojo-Lopez A, Gil-Poch E, Martın-Romo I,
Arroyo-Dıez FJ. Rapid improvement in time in
range after the implementation of an advanced
hybrid closed-loop system in adolescents and
adults with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol
Ther 2021;23:609–615
109. Breton MD, Kovatchev BP. One year real-
world use of the Control-IQ advanced hybrid
closed-loop technology. Diabetes Technol Ther
2021;23:601–608
110. Forlenza GP, Ekhlaspour L, DiMeglio LA,
et al. Glycemic outcomes of children 2-6 years of
age with type 1 diabetes during the pediatric
MiniMed 670G system trial. Pediatr Diabetes
2022;23:324–329
111. Messer LH, Berget C, Pyle L, et al. Real-
world use of a new hybrid closed loop improves
glycemic control in youth with type 1 diabetes.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2021;23:837–843
S276
Children and Adolescents
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

112. Varimo T, Pulkkinen MA, Hakonen E, Hero
M, Miettinen PJ, Tuomaala AK. First year on
commercial hybrid closed-loop system-experience
on 111 children and adolescents with type 1
diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes 2021;22:909–915
113. Ware J, Allen JM, Boughton CK, et al.;
KidsAP Consortium. Randomized trial of closed-
loop control in very young children with type 1
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2022;386:209–219
114. Isganaitis E, Raghinaru D, Ambler-Osborn L,
et al.; iDCL Trial Research Group. Closed-loop
insulin therapy improves glycemic control in
adolescents and young adults: outcomes from
the International Diabetes Closed-Loop Trial.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2021;23:342–349
115. Schoelwer MJ, Kanapka LG, Wadwa RP,
et al.; iDCL Trial Research Group. Predictors of
time-in-range (70-180mg/dL) achieved using a
closed-loop control system. Diabetes Technol
Ther 2021;23:475–481
116. Sherr JL, Bode BW, Forlenza GP, et al.;
Omnipod 5 in Preschoolers Study Group. Safety
and glycemic outcomes with a tubeless automated
insulin delivery system in very young children with
type 1 diabetes: a single-arm multicenter clinical
trial. Diabetes Care 2022;45:1907–1910
117. Marigliano M, Eckert AJ, Guness PK, et al.;
SWEET Study Group. Association of the use of
diabetes technology with HbA1c and BMI-SDS in an
international cohort of children and adolescents
with type 1 diabetes: the SWEET project ex-
perience. Pediatr Diabetes 2021;22:1120–1128
118. Bergenstal RM, Garg S,Weinzimer SA, et al.
Safety of a hybrid closed-loop insulin delivery
system in patients with type 1 diabetes. JAMA
2016;316:1407–1408
119. Thabit H, Tauschmann M, Allen JM, et al.
Home use of an artiﬁcial beta cell in type 1
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2015;373:2129–2140
120. Kovatchev B, Cheng P, Anderson SM, et al.
Feasibility of long-term closed-loop control: a
multicenter 6-month trial of 24/7 automated
insulin delivery. Diabetes Technol Ther 2017;19:
18–24
121. Redondo MJ, Libman I, Maahs DM, et al.
The evolution of hemoglobin A1c targets for youth
with type 1 diabetes: rationale and supporting
evidence. Diabetes Care 2021;44:301–312
122. Cooper MN, O’Connell SM, Davis EA, Jones
TW. A population-based study of risk factors for
severe hypoglycaemia in a contemporary cohort
of childhood-onset type 1 diabetes. Diabetologia
2013;56:2164–2170
123. Haynes A, Hermann JM, Miller KM, et al.;
T1D Exchange, WACDD and DPV registries. Severe
hypoglycemia rates are not associated with HbA1c:
a cross-sectional analysis of 3 contemporary
pediatric diabetes registry databases. Pediatr Dia-
betes 2017;18:643–650
124. Haynes A, Hermann JM, Clapin H, et al.;
WACDD and DPV registries. Decreasing trends in
mean HbA1c are not associated with increasing
rates of severe hypoglycemia in children: a
longitudinal
analysis
of
two
contemporary
population-based pediatric type 1 diabetes
registries from Australia and Germany/Austria
between 1995 and 2016. Diabetes Care 2019;42:
1630–1636
125. Fredheim S, Johansen A, Thorsen SU, et al.;
Danish Society for Diabetes in Childhood and
Adolescence. Nationwide reduction in the frequency
of severe hypoglycemia by half. Acta Diabetol
2015;52:591–599
126. Birkebaek NH, Drivvoll AK, Aakeson K, et al.
Incidence of severe hypoglycemia in children with
type 1 diabetes in the Nordic countries in the
period 2008-2012: association with hemoglobin
A1c and treatment modality. BMJ Open Diabetes
Res Care 2017;5:e000377
127. Ly TT, Nicholas JA, Retterath A, Lim EM,
Davis EA, Jones TW. Effect of sensor-augmented
insulin pump therapy and automated insulin
suspension vs standard insulin pump therapy on
hypoglycemia in patients with type 1 diabetes:
a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2013;310:1240–
1247
128. Downie E, Craig ME, Hing S, Cusumano J,
Chan AK, Donaghue KC. Continued reduction in
the prevalence of retinopathy in adolescents with
type 1 diabetes: role of insulin therapy and
glycemic control. Diabetes Care 2011;34:2368–
2373
129. Karges B, Rosenbauer J, Kapellen T, et al.
Hemoglobin A1c levels and risk of severe
hypoglycemia in children and young adults with
type 1 diabetes from Germany and Austria: a
trend analysis in a cohort of 37,539 patients
between 1995 and 2012. PLoS Med 2014;11:
e1001742
130. Johnson SR, Cooper MN, Jones TW, Davis
EA. Long-term outcome of insulin pump therapy
in children with type 1 diabetes assessed in a
large population-based case-control study. Dia-
betologia 2013;56:2392–2400
131. Karges B, Kapellen T, Wagner VM, et al.;
DPV Initiative. Glycated hemoglobin A1c as a risk
factor for severe hypoglycemia in pediatric type 1
diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes 2017;18:51–58
132. Saydah S, Imperatore G, Divers J, et al.
Occurrence of severe hypoglycaemic events
among US youth and young adults with type 1 or
type 2 diabetes. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab
2019;2:e00057
133. Ishtiak-Ahmed K, Carstensen B, Pedersen-
Bjergaard U, Jørgensen ME. Incidence trends and
predictors of hospitalization for hypoglycemia in
17,230 adult patients with type 1 diabetes: a
Danish Register linkage cohort study. Diabetes
Care 2017;40:226–232
134. Maahs DM, Hermann JM, DuBose SN,
et al.; DPV Initiative; T1D Exchange Clinic
Network. Contrasting the clinical
care
and
outcomes of 2,622 children with type 1 diabetes
less than 6 years of age in the United States T1D
Exchange and German/Austrian DPV registries.
Diabetologia 2014;57:1578–1585
135. Swift PG, Skinner TC, de Beaufort CE, et al.;
Hvidoere Study Group on Childhood Diabetes.
Target setting in intensive insulin management is
associated with metabolic control: the Hvidoere
childhood diabetes study group centre differences
study 2005. Pediatr Diabetes 2010;11:271–278
136. Laffel LM, Kanapka LG, Beck RW, et al.;
CGM Intervention in Teens and Young Adults
with T1D (CITY) Study Group; CDE10. Effect of
continuous glucose monitoring on glycemic
control in adolescents and young adults with
type 1 diabetes: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA
2020;323:2388–2396
137. Strategies to Enhance New CGM Use
in Early Childhood (SENCE) Study Group. A
randomized clinical trial assessing continuous
glucose monitoring (CGM) use with standardized
education with or without a family behavioral
intervention compared with ﬁngerstick blood
glucose monitoring in very young children with
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2021;44:464–472
138. Bergenstal RM, Klonoff DC, Garg SK, et al.;
ASPIRE In-Home Study Group. Threshold-based
insulin-pump interruption for reduction of hypo-
glycemia. N Engl J Med 2013;369:224–232
139. Abraham MB, Davey R, O’Grady MJ, et al.
Effectiveness of a predictive algorithm in the
prevention of exercise-induced hypoglycemia in
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2016;18:
543–550
140. Buckingham BA, Bailey TS, Christiansen M,
et al. Evaluation of a predictive low-glucose
management system in-clinic. Diabetes Technol
Ther 2017;19:288–292
141. Nimri R, Muller I, Atlas E, et al. MD-Logic
overnight control for 6 weeks of home use
in patients with type 1 diabetes: randomized
crossover trial. Diabetes Care 2014;37:3025–3032
142. El-Khatib FH, Balliro C, Hillard MA, et al.
Home use of a bihormonal bionic pancreas
versus insulin pump therapy in adults with type 1
diabetes: a multicentre randomised crossover
trial. Lancet 2017;389:369–380
143. Levine BS, Anderson BJ, Butler DA, Antisdel
JE, Brackett J, Laffel LM. Predictors of glycemic
control and short-term adverse outcomes in
youth with type 1 diabetes. J Pediatr 2001;
139:197–203
144. Miller KM, Beck RW, Bergenstal RM, et al.;
T1D Exchange Clinic Network. Evidence of a
strong association between frequency of self-
monitoring of blood glucose and hemoglobin A1c
levels in T1D exchange clinic registry participants.
Diabetes Care 2013;36:2009–2014
145. Patton SR, Noser AE, Youngkin EM, Majidi S,
Clements MA. Early initiation of diabetes devices
relates to improved glycemic control in children
with recent-onset type 1 diabetes mellitus. Dia-
betes Technol Ther 2019;21:379–384
146. Battelino T, Danne T, Bergenstal RM, et al.
Clinical targets for continuous glucose monitoring
data interpretation: recommendations from the
International Consensus on Time in Range. Dia-
betes Care 2019;42:1593–1603
147. Vigersky RA, McMahon C. The relationship
of hemoglobin A1C to time-in-range in patients
with diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;
21:81–85
148. Petersson J, Åkesson K, Sundberg F, S€arnblad
S. Translating glycated hemoglobin A1c into time
spent in glucose target range: a multicenter study.
Pediatr Diabetes 2019;20:339–344
149. Warncke K, Fr€ohlich-Reiterer EE, Thon A,
Hofer SE, Wiemann D; DPV Initiative of the
German Working Group for Pediatric Diabetology;
German BMBF Competence Network for Diabetes
Mellitus. Polyendocrinopathy in children, ado-
lescents, and young adults with type 1 diabetes: a
multicenter analysis of 28,671 patients from the
German/Austrian DPV-Wiss database. Diabetes
Care 2010;33:2010–2012
150. Nederstigt C, Uitbeijerse BS, Janssen LGM,
Corssmit EPM, de Koning EJP, Dekkers OM.
Associated auto-immune disease in type 1 dia-
betes patients: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Eur J Endocrinol 2019;180:135–144
151. Kozhakhmetova A, Wyatt RC, Caygill C,
et al. A quarter of patients with type 1 diabetes
have co-existing non-islet autoimmunity: the
diabetesjournals.org/care
Children and Adolescents
S277
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

ﬁndings of a UK population-based family study.
Clin Exp Immunol 2018;192:251–258
152. Hughes JW, Riddlesworth TD, DiMeglio LA,
Miller KM, Rickels MR; T1D Exchange Clinic
Network. Autoimmune diseases in children and
adults with type 1 diabetes from the T1D
Exchange Clinic Registry. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2016;101:4931–4937
153. Kahaly GJ, Hansen MP. Type 1 diabetes
associated autoimmunity. Autoimmun Rev 2016;
15:644–648
154. Roldan MB, Alonso M, Barrio R. Thyroid
autoimmunity in children and adolescents with
type 1 diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Nutr Metab
1999;12:27–31
155. Shun CB, Donaghue KC, Phelan H, Twigg
SM, Craig ME. Thyroid autoimmunity in type 1
diabetes: systematic review and meta-analysis.
Diabet Med 2014;31:126–135
156. Triolo TM, Armstrong TK, McFann K, et al.
Additional autoimmune disease found in 33% of
patients at type 1 diabetes onset. Diabetes Care
2011;34:1211–1213
157. Kordonouri O, Deiss D, Danne T, Dorow A,
Bassir C, Gr€uters-Kieslich A. Predictivity of thyroid
autoantibodies for the development of thyroid
disorders in children and adolescents with type 1
diabetes. Diabet Med 2002;19:518–521
158. Dost A, Rohrer TR, Fr€ohlich-Reiterer E, et al.;
DPV Initiative and the German Competence
Network Diabetes Mellitus. Hyperthyroidism in
276 children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes
from Germany and Austria. Horm Res Paediatr
2015;84:190–198
159. Jonsdottir B, Larsson C, Carlsson A, et al.;
Better Diabetes Diagnosis Study Group. Thyroid
and islet autoantibodies predict autoimmune
thyroid disease at type 1 diabetes diagnosis. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2017;102:1277–1285
160. Mohn A, Di Michele S, Di Luzio R, Tumini S,
Chiarelli F.The effect of subclinical hypothyroidism
on metabolic control in children and adolescents
with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Diabet Med 2002;
19:70–73
161. Holmes GK. Screening for coeliac disease in
type 1 diabetes. Arch Dis Child 2002;87:495–498
162. Rewers M, Liu E, Simmons J, Redondo MJ,
Hoffenberg EJ. Celiac disease associated with
type 1 diabetes mellitus. Endocrinol Metab Clin
North Am 2004;33:197–214, xi
163. Pham-Short A, Donaghue KC, Ambler G,
Phelan H, Twigg S, Craig ME. Screening for celiac
disease in type 1 diabetes: a systematic review.
Pediatrics 2015;136:e170–e176
164. Craig
ME,
Prinz
N,
Boyle
CT,
et
al.;
Australasian Diabetes Data Network (ADDN); T1D
Exchange Clinic Network (T1DX); National Paediatric
Diabetes Audit (NPDA) and the Royal College of
Paediatrics and Child Health; Prospective Diabetes
Follow-up Registry (DPV) initiative. Prevalence of
celiac disease in 52,721 youth with type 1 diabetes:
international comparison across three continents.
Diabetes Care 2017;40:1034–1040
165. Cerutti F, Bruno G, Chiarelli F, Lorini R,
Meschi F; Diabetes Study Group of the Italian
Society of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology.
Younger age at onset and sex predict celiac disease
in children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes:
an Italian multicenter study. Diabetes Care 2004;
27:1294–1298
166. Simmons JH, Foster NC, Riddlesworth TD,
et al.; T1D Exchange Clinic Network. Sex- and age-
dependent effects of celiac disease on growth and
weight gain in children with type 1 diabetes:
analysis of the Type 1 Diabetes Exchange clinic
registry. Pediatr Diabetes 2018;19:741–748
167. Margoni D, Chouliaras G, Duscas G, et al.
Bone health in children with celiac disease
assessed by dual x-ray absorptiometry: effect of
gluten-free diet and predictive value of serum
biochemical indices. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr
2012;54:680–684
168. Rohrer TR,Wolf J, Liptay S, et al.; DPV Initiative
and the German BMBF Competence Network
Diabetes Mellitus. Microvascular complications in
childhood-onset type 1 diabetes and celiac disease:
a
multicenter
longitudinal analysis
of 56,514
patients from the German-Austrian DPV database.
Diabetes Care 2015;38:801–807
169. Mollazadegan K, Kugelberg M, Montgomery
SM, Sanders DS, Ludvigsson J, Ludvigsson JF. A
population-based study of the risk of diabetic
retinopathy in patients with type 1 diabetes and
celiac disease. Diabetes Care 2013;36:316–321
170. Rubio-Tapia A, Hill ID, Kelly CP, Calderwood
AH; American College of Gastroenterology. ACG
clinical guidelines: diagnosis and management of
celiac disease. Am J Gastroenterol 2013;108:
656–676
171. Husby S, Koletzko S, Korponay-Szabo IR,
et al.; ESPGHAN Working Group on Coeliac Disease
Diagnosis; ESPGHAN Gastroenterology Committee;
European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, and Nutrition. European Society
for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology,
and Nutrition guidelines for the diagnosis of
coeliac disease. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr
2012;54:136–160
172. Paul SP, Sandhu BK, Spray CH, Basude D,
Ramani P. Evidence supporting serology-based
pathway for diagnosing celiac disease in asy-
mptomatic children from high-risk groups. J
Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2018;66:641–644
173. Abid N, McGlone O, Cardwell C, McCallion W,
Carson D. Clinical and metabolic effects of gluten
free diet in children with type 1 diabetes and
coeliac disease. Pediatr Diabetes 2011;12:322–325
174. Kurppa K, Paavola A, Collin P, et al.
Beneﬁts of a gluten-free diet for asymptomatic
patients with serologic markers of celiac disease.
Gastroenterology 2014;147:610–617.e1
175. Flynn JT, Kaelber DC, Baker-Smith CM, et al.;
Subcommittee on Screening and Management of
High Blood Pressure in Children. Clinical practice
guideline for screening and management of high
blood pressure in children and adolescents.
Pediatrics 2017;140:e20171904
176. Marcovecchio ML, Chiesa ST, Bond S, et al.;
AdDIT Study Group. ACE inhibitors and statins in
adolescents with type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med
2017;377:1733–1745
177. de Ferranti SD, de Boer IH, Fonseca V, et al.
Type 1 diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular
disease: a scientiﬁc statement from the American
Heart
Association
and
American
Diabetes
Association. Diabetes Care 2014;37:2843–2863
178. Rodriguez BL, Fujimoto WY, Mayer-Davis EJ,
et al. Prevalence of cardiovascular disease risk
factors in U.S. children and adolescents with
diabetes: the SEARCH for diabetes in youth study.
Diabetes Care 2006;29:1891–1896
179. Margeirsdottir HD, Larsen JR, Brunborg C,
Overby NC; Norwegian Study Group for Childhood
Diabetes. High prevalence of cardiovascular risk
factors in children and adolescents with type 1
diabetes: a population-based study. Diabetologia
2008;51:554–561
180. Schwab KO, Doerfer J, Hecker W, et al.; DPV
Initiative of the German Working Group for
Pediatric Diabetology. Spectrum and prevalence
of atherogenic risk factors in 27,358 children,
adolescents, and young adults with type 1
diabetes: cross-sectional data from the German
diabetes documentation and quality management
system (DPV). Diabetes Care 2006;29:218–225
181. Singh TP, Groehn H, Kazmers A. Vascular
function and carotid intimal-medial thickness in
children with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;41:661–665
182. Haller MJ, Stein J, Shuster J, et al. Peripheral
artery tonometry demonstrates altered endothelial
function in children with type 1 diabetes. Pediatr
Diabetes 2007;8:193–198
183. Urbina EM, Wadwa RP, Davis C, et al.
Prevalence of increased arterial stiffness in
children with type 1 diabetes mellitus differs by
measurement site and sex: the SEARCH for
Diabetes in Youth Study. J Pediatr 2010;156:731–
737.e731
184. Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for
Cardiovascular Health and Risk Reduction in
Children and Adolescents; National Heart, Lung,
and Blood Institute. Expert panel on integrated
guidelines for cardiovascular health and risk
reduction in children and adolescents: summary
report. Pediatrics 2011;128(Suppl. 5):S213–S256
185. Kershnar AK, Daniels SR, Imperatore G,
et al. Lipid abnormalities are prevalent in youth
with type 1 and type 2 diabetes: the SEARCH for
Diabetes in Youth Study. J Pediatr 2006;149:
314–319
186. Blaha
MJ, Blumenthal RS, Brinton EA;
National Lipid Association Taskforce on Non-HDL
Cholesterol.The importance of non-HDL cholesterol
reporting in lipid management. J Clin Lipidol 2008;
2:267–273
187. Maahs DM, Dabelea D, D’Agostino RB Jr,
et al.; SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study.
Glucose control predicts 2-year change in lipid
proﬁle in youth with type 1 diabetes. J Pediatr
2013;162:101–107.e1
188. Daniels SR; Committee on Nutrition. Lipid
screening and cardiovascular health in childhood.
Pediatrics 2008;122:198–208
189. Kavey RE, Allada V, Daniels SR, et al.;
American Heart Association Expert Panel on
Population and Prevention Science; American Heart
Association Council on Cardiovascular Disease in
the Young; American Heart Association Council on
Epidemiology and Prevention; American Heart
Association Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity
and Metabolism; American Heart Association
Council on High Blood Pressure Research; American
Heart
Association
Council
on
Cardiovascular
Nursing; American Heart Association Council on the
Kidney in Heart Disease; Interdisciplinary Working
Group on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research.
Cardiovascular risk reduction in high-risk pediatric
patients: a scientiﬁc statement from the American
Heart Association Expert Panel on Population and
Prevention Science; the Councils on Cardiovascular
Disease in the Young, Epidemiology and Prevention,
Nutrition, Physical Activity and Metabolism, High
Blood Pressure Research, Cardiovascular Nursing,
and the Kidney in Heart Disease; and the
Interdisciplinary Working Group on Quality of Care
S278
Children and Adolescents
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

and
Outcomes
Research:
endorsed
by
the
American Academy of Pediatrics. Circulation 2006;
114:2710–2738
190. Cadario F, Prodam F, Pasqualicchio S, et al.
Lipid proﬁle and nutritional intake in children and
adolescents with type 1 diabetes improve after a
structured dietician training to a Mediterranean-
style diet. J Endocrinol Invest 2012;35:160–168
191. Salem MA, AboElAsrar MA, Elbarbary NS,
ElHilaly RA, Refaat YM. Is exercise a therapeutic
tool for improvement of cardiovascular risk
factors in adolescents with type 1 diabetes
mellitus? A randomised controlled trial. Diabetol
Metab Syndr 2010;2:47
192. McCrindle BW, Urbina EM, Dennison BA,
et al.; American Heart Association Atherosclerosis,
Hypertension, and Obesity in Youth Committee;
American Heart Association Council of Cardio-
vascular Disease in the Young; American Heart
Association Council on Cardiovascular Nursing.
Drug therapy of high-risk lipid abnormalities in
children and adolescents: a scientiﬁc statement
from the American Heart Association Athero-
sclerosis, Hypertension, and Obesity in Youth
Committee, Council of Cardiovascular Disease in
the Young, with the Council on Cardiovascular
Nursing. Circulation 2007;115:1948–1967
193. Salo P,Viikari J, H€am€al€ainen M, et al. Serum
cholesterol ester fatty acids in 7- and 13-month-
old children in a prospective randomized trial of a
low-saturated fat, low-cholesterol diet: the STRIP
baby project. Special Turku Coronary Risk Factor
Intervention Project for Children. Acta Paediatr
1999;88:505–512
194. McCrindle BW, Ose L, Marais AD. Efﬁcacy
and safety of atorvastatin in children and
adolescents with familial hypercholesterolemia
or severe hyperlipidemia: a multicenter, ran-
domized, placebo-controlled trial. J Pediatr 2003;
143:74–80
195. Wiegman A, Hutten BA, de Groot E, et al.
Efﬁcacy and safety of statin therapy in children
with familial hypercholesterolemia: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA 2004;292:331–337
196. Daniels M, DuBose SN, Maahs DM, et al.;
T1D Exchange Clinic Network. Factors associated
with microalbuminuria in 7,549 children and
adolescents with type 1 diabetes in the T1D
Exchange clinic registry. Diabetes Care 2013;36:
2639–2645
197. Schwartz GJ, Work DF. Measurement and
estimation of GFR in children and adolescents.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2009;4:1832–1843
198. Inker LA, Schmid CH, Tighiouart H, et al.;
CKD-EPI
Investigators.
Estimating
glomerular
ﬁltration rate from serum creatinine and cystatin
C. N Engl J Med 2012;367:20–29
199. Cho YH, Craig ME, Hing S, et al. Microvascular
complications assessment in adolescents with 2- to
5-yr duration of type 1 diabetes from 1990 to 2006.
Pediatr Diabetes 2011;12:682–689
200. Scanlon PH, Stratton IM, Bachmann MO,
Jones
C;
Four
Nations
Diabetic
Retinopathy
Screening Study Group. Risk of diabetic retinopathy
at ﬁrst screen in children at 12 and 13 years of age.
Diabet Med 2016;33:1655–1658
201. Beauchamp G, Boyle CT, Tamborlane WV,
et al.; T1D Exchange Clinic Network. Treatable
diabetic retinopathy is extremely rare among
pediatric T1D Exchange clinic registry participants.
Diabetes Care 2016;39:e218–e219
202. Nathan DM, Bebu I, Hainsworth D, et al.;
DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Frequency of evidence-
based screening for retinopathy in type 1 diabetes.
N Engl J Med 2017;376:1507–1516
203. Gubitosi-Klug RA, Bebu I, White NH, et al.;
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT)/
Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and
Complications (EDIC) Research Group. Screening
eye exams in youth with type 1 diabetes under
18 years of age: once may be enough? Pediatr
Diabetes 2019;20:743–749
204. Jaiswal M, Divers J, Dabelea D, et al.
Prevalence of and risk factors for diabetic
peripheral neuropathy in youth with type 1 and
type 2 diabetes: SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth
Study. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1226–1232
205. Pop-Busui R, Boulton AJ, Feldman EL, et al.
Diabetic neuropathy: a position statement by the
American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care
2017;40:136–154
206. Imperatore G, Boyle JP,Thompson TJ, et al.;
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study Group.
Projections of type 1 and type 2 diabetes burden
in the U.S. population aged <20 years through
2050: dynamic modeling of incidence, mortality,
and population growth. Diabetes Care 2012;35:
2515–2520
207. Pettitt DJ, Talton J, Dabelea D, et al.;
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study Group.
Prevalence of diabetes in U.S. youth in 2009: the
SEARCH for diabetes in youth study. Diabetes
Care 2014;37:402–408
208. Copeland KC, Zeitler P, Geffner M, et al.;
TODAY Study Group. Characteristics of adolescents
and youth with recent-onset type 2 diabetes: the
TODAY cohort at baseline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2011;96:159–167
209. Bjornstad P, Drews KL, Caprio S, et al.;
TODAY Study Group. Long-term complications in
youth-onset type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med
2021;385:416–426
210. Arslanian SA. Metabolic differences between
Caucasian and African-American children and the
relationship to type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Pediatr
Endocrinol Metab 2002;15(Suppl. 1):509–517
211. Naughton MJ, Ruggiero AM, Lawrence JM,
et al.; SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study Group.
Health-related quality of life of children and
adolescents with type 1 or type 2 diabetes
mellitus: SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study.
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2008;162:649–657
212. Wadden TA,Webb VL, Moran CH, Bailer BA.
Lifestyle modiﬁcation for obesity: new deve-
lopments in diet, physical activity, and behavior
therapy. Circulation 2012;125:1157–1170
213. Whalen DJ, Belden AC, Tillman R, Barch
DM, Luby JL. Early adversity, psychopathology,
and latent class proﬁles of global physical health
from
preschool
through
early
adolescence.
Psychosom Med 2016;78:1008–1018
214. Dabelea D, Mayer-Davis EJ, Saydah S, et al.;
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study. Prevalence
of type 1 and type 2 diabetes among children
and adolescents from 2001 to 2009. JAMA
2014;311:1778–1786
215. Buse JB, Kaufman FR, Linder B, Hirst K, El
Ghormli L; HEALTHY Study Group. Diabetes
screening with hemoglobin A(1c) versus fasting
plasma glucose in a multiethnic middle-school
cohort. Diabetes Care 2013;36:429–435
216. Klingensmith GJ, Pyle L, Arslanian S, et al.;
TODAY Study Group. The presence of GAD and
IA-2 antibodies in youth with a type 2 diabetes
phenotype: results from the TODAY study. Dia-
betes Care 2010;33:1970–1975
217. Hannon TS, Arslanian SA.The changing face
of diabetes in youth: lessons learned from
studies of type 2 diabetes. Ann N Y Acad Sci
2015;1353:113–137
218. Kapadia
C;
Drugs
and
Therapeutics
Committee of the Pediatric Endocrine Society.
Hemoglobin A1c measurement for the diagnosis
of type 2 diabetes in children. Int J Pediatr
Endocrinol 2012;2012:31
219. Wallace AS, Wang D, Shin JI, Selvin E.
Screening and diagnosis of prediabetes and
diabetes in US children and adolescents. Pediatrics
2020;146:e20200265
220. Dabelea D, Rewers A, Stafford JM, et al.;
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study Group.
Trends in the prevalence of ketoacidosis at
diabetes diagnosis: the SEARCH for diabetes in
youth study. Pediatrics 2014;133:e938–e945
221. Hutchins J, Barajas RA, Hale D, Escaname E,
Lynch J.Type 2 diabetes in a 5-year-old and single
center experience of type 2 diabetes in youth
under 10. Pediatr Diabetes 2017;18:674–677
222. Ferrara CT, Geyer SM, Liu YF, et al.; Type 1
Diabetes TrialNet Study Group. Excess BMI in
childhood: a modiﬁable risk factor for type 1
diabetes development? Diabetes Care 2017;40:
698–701
223. Pinhas-Hamiel O, Dolan LM, Zeitler PS.
Diabetic ketoacidosis among obese African-
American adolescents with NIDDM. Diabetes
Care 1997;20:484–486
224. TODAY Study Group. Safety and tolerability
of the treatment of youth-onset type 2 diabetes:
the TODAY experience. Diabetes Care 2013;36:
1765–1771
225. TODAY Study Group. Retinopathy in youth
with type 2 diabetes participating in the TODAY
clinical trial. Diabetes Care 2013;36:1772–1774
226. TODAY Study Group. Lipid and inﬂammatory
cardiovascular risk worsens over 3 years in youth
with type 2 diabetes: the TODAY clinical trial.
Diabetes Care 2013;36:1758–1764
227. TODAY
Study
Group.
Rapid
rise
in
hypertension and nephropathy in youth with
type 2 diabetes: the TODAY clinical trial. Diabetes
Care 2013;36:1735–1741
228. Hudson JL, Baum JI, Diaz EC, Børsheim E.
Dietary protein requirements in children: methods
for consideration. Nutrients 2021;13:1554
229. Grey M, Schreiner B, Pyle L. Development
of a diabetes education program for youth with
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Educ 2009;35:108–116
230. American Diabetes Association. Be Healthy
Today; Be Healthy For Life. Arlington, VA, American
Diabetes Association. Accessed 1 October 2023.
Available from http://main.diabetes.org/dorg/
PDFs/Type-2-Diabetes-in-Youth/Type-2-Diabetes
-in-Youth.pdf
231. Atkinson A, Radjenovic D. Meeting quality
standards for self-management education in
pediatric type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Spectr 2007;
20:40–46
232. Copeland KC, Silverstein J, Moore KR, et al.;
American Academy of Pediatrics. Management
of newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM) in children and adolescents. Pediatrics
2013;131:364–382
233. Zeitler P, Hirst K, Pyle L, et al.; TODAY Study
Group. A clinical trial to maintain glycemic
diabetesjournals.org/care
Children and Adolescents
S279
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

control in youth with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J
Med 2012;366:2247–2256
234. RISE Consortium. Impact of insulin and
metformin versus metformin alone on b-cell
function in youth with impaired glucose tolerance
or recently diagnosed type 2 diabetes. Diabetes
Care 2018;41:1717–1725
235. Tamborlane
WV,
Barrientos-Perez
M,
Fainberg U, et al.; Ellipse Trial Investigators.
Liraglutide in children and adolescents with type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;381:637–646
236. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA
approves treatment for pediatric patients with
type 2 diabetes - drug information update. 2021.
Accessed 1 October 2023. Available from https://
content.govdelivery.com/accounts/USFDA/
bulletins/2e98d66
237. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA
approves new treatment for pediatric patients
with type 2 diabetes. 2019. Accessed 1 October
2023. Available from https://www.fda.gov/news-
events/press-announcements/fda-approves-new-
treatment-pediatric-patients-type-2-diabetes
238. Tamborlane WV, Bishai R, Geller D, et al.
Once-weekly exenatide in youth with type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2022;45:1833–1840
239. Arslanian SA, Hannon T, Zeitler P, et al.;
AWARD-PEDS Investigators. Once-weekly dulaglutide
for the treatment of youths with type 2 diabetes. N
Engl J Med 2022;387:433–443
240. Laffel LM, Danne T, Klingensmith GJ, et al.;
DINAMO Study Group. Efﬁcacy and safety of the
SGLT2 inhibitor empagliﬂozin versus placebo and
the DPP-4 inhibitor linagliptin versus placebo in
young people with type 2 diabetes (DINAMO): a
multicentre, randomised, double-blind, parallel
group, phase 3 trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
2023;11:169–181
241. Chan
CL.
Use
of
continuous
glucose
monitoring in youth-onset type 2 diabetes. Curr
Diab Rep 2017;17:66
242. Weghuber D, Kelly AS, Arslanian S. Once-
weekly semaglutide in adolescents with obesity.
Reply. N Engl J Med 2023;388:1146
243. Kelly AS, Auerbach P, Barrientos-Perez M,
et al.; NN8022-4180 Trial Investigators. A ran-
domized,
controlled
trial
of
liraglutide
for
adolescents with obesity. N Engl J Med 2020;
382:2117–2128
244. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA
approves weight management drug for patients
aged 12 and older. 2021. Accessed 1 October
2023. Available from https://www.fda.gov/drugs/
drug-safety-and-availability/fda-approves-weight-
management-drug-patients-aged-12-and-older
245. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA
approves treatment for chronic weight management
in pediatric patients aged 12 years and older. 2022.
Accessed Accessed 1 October 2023. Available from
https://www.fda.gov/drugs/news-events-human-
drugs/fda-approves-treatment-chronic-weight-
management-pediatric-patients-aged-12-years-
and-older
246. Inge TH, Courcoulas AP, Jenkins TM, et al.;
Teen-LABS Consortium. Weight loss and health
status 3 years after bariatric surgery in adole-
scents. N Engl J Med 2016;374:113–123
247. Inge TH, Laffel LM, Jenkins TM, et al.;
Teen–Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery
(Teen-LABS) and Treatment Options of Type 2
Diabetes in Adolescents and Youth (TODAY)
Consortia. Comparison of surgical and medical
therapy for type 2 diabetes in severely obese
adolescents. JAMA Pediatr 2018;172:452–460
248. Rubino F, Nathan DM, Eckel RH, et al.;
Delegates of the 2nd Diabetes Surgery Summit.
Metabolic surgery in the treatment algorithm for
type 2 diabetes: a joint statement by International
Diabetes Organizations. Diabetes Care 2016;39:
861–877
249. Pratt JS, Lenders CM, Dionne EA, et al. Best
practice updates for pediatric/adolescent weight
loss surgery. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2009;17:
901–910
250. Dolan K, Creighton L, Hopkins G, Fielding G.
Laparoscopic gastric banding in morbidly obese
adolescents. Obes Surg 2003;13:101–104
251. Sugerman HJ, Sugerman EL, DeMaria EJ,
et al. Bariatric surgery for severely obese adole-
scents. J Gastrointest Surg 2003;7:102–108
252. Inge TH, Garcia V, Daniels S, et al. A
multidisciplinary approach to the adolescent
bariatric surgical patient. J Pediatr Surg 2004;39:
442–447
253. Lawson ML, Kirk S, Mitchell T, et al.;
Pediatric
Bariatric
Study
Group.
One-year
outcomes
of
Roux-en-Y
gastric
bypass
for
morbidly obese adolescents: a multicenter study
from the Pediatric Bariatric Study Group. J
Pediatr Surg 2006;41:137–143
254. Inge TH, Zeller M, Harmon C, et al. Teen-
Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery:
methodological features of the ﬁrst prospective
multicenter study of adolescent bariatric surgery.
J Pediatr Surg 2007;42:1969–1971
255. Ells LJ, Mead E, Atkinson G, et al. Surgery
for the treatment of obesity in children and
adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015:
CD011740
256. Michalsky MP, Inge TH, Simmons M, et al.;
Teen-LABS Consortium. Cardiovascular risk factors
in severely obese adolescents: the Teen Longi-
tudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (Teen-
LABS) study. JAMA Pediatr 2015;169:438–444
257. Zeinoddini A, Heidari R, Talebpour M.
Laparoscopic gastric plication in morbidly obese
adolescents: a prospective study. Surg Obes Relat
Dis 2014;10:1135–1139
258. G€othberg G, Gronowitz E, Flodmark CE,
et al. Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass in
adolescents with morbid obesity—surgical aspects
and clinical outcome. Semin Pediatr Surg 2014;23:
11–16
259. Inge TH, Prigeon RL, Elder DA, et al. Insulin
sensitivity and b-cell function improve after
gastric bypass in severely obese adolescents. J
Pediatr 2015;167:1042–1048.e1
260. Styne DM, Arslanian SA, Connor EL, et al.
Pediatric obesity-assessment, treatment, and
prevention: an Endocrine Society clinical practice
guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2017;102:
709–757
261. Hampl SE, Hassink SG, Skinner AC, et al.
Clinical practice guideline for the evaluation and
treatment of children and adolescents with
obesity. Pediatrics 2023;151:e2022060640
262. Eppens MC, Craig ME, Cusumano J, et al.
Prevalence of diabetes complications in adole-
scents with type 2 compared with type 1 dia-
betes. Diabetes Care 2006;29:1300–1306
263. Song SH, Hardisty CA. Early onset type 2
diabetes mellitus: a harbinger for complications
in
later
years—clinical
observation
from
a
secondary care cohort. QJM 2009;102:799–806
264. Zeitler
P,
Fu
J,
Tandon
N,
et
al.;
International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent
Diabetes.
ISPAD
clinical
practice
consensus
guidelines 2014. Type 2 diabetes in the child and
adolescent. Pediatr Diabetes 2014;15(Suppl. 20):
26–46
265. Cefalu WT. “TODAY” reﬂects on the changing
“faces” of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2013;36:
1732–1734
266. Lawrence JM, Standiford DA, Loots B, et al.;
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study. Prevalence
and correlates of depressed mood among youth
with diabetes: the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth
study. Pediatrics 2006;117:1348–1358
267. Levitt Katz LE, Swami S, Abraham M, et al.
Neuropsychiatric disorders at the presentation of
type 2 diabetes mellitus in children. Pediatr Dia-
betes 2005;6:84–89
268. Lewis-Fernandez R, Rotheram-Borus MJ,
Betts VT, et al. Rethinking funding priorities in
mental health research. Br J Psychiatry 2016;208:
507–509
269. Reinehr T. Type 2 diabetes mellitus in
children and adolescents. World J Diabetes 2013;
4:270–281
270. Pinhas-Hamiel O, Hamiel U, Levy-Shraga Y.
Eating disorders in adolescents with type 1
diabetes: challenges in diagnosis and treatment.
World J Diabetes 2015;6:517–526
271. McVoy M, Hardin H, Fulchiero E, et al.
Mental health comorbidity and youth onset type 2
diabetes: a systematic review of the literature. Int J
Psychiatry Med 2023;58:37–55
272. Shelton RC. Depression, antidepressants,
and weight gain in children. Obesity (Silver
Spring) 2016;24:2450
273. Baeza I, Vigo L, de la Serna E, et al. The
effects of antipsychotics on weight gain, weight-
related hormones and homocysteine in children
and adolescents: a 1-year follow-up study. Eur
Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2017;26:35–46
274. TODAY Study Group. Pregnancy outcomes
in young women with youth-onset type 2
diabetes followed in the TODAY study. Diabetes
Care 2021;45:1038–1045
275. Karter AJ, Stevens MR, Gregg EW, et al.
Educational disparities in rates of smoking among
diabetic adults: the translating research into
action for diabetes study. Am J Public Health
2008;98:365–370
276. Reynolds K, Liese AD, Anderson AM, et al.
Prevalence of tobacco use and association between
cardiometabolic risk factors and cigarette smoking
in youth with type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus. J
Pediatr 2011;158:594–601.e1
277. Scott LJ, Warram JH, Hanna LS, Laffel LM,
Ryan L, Krolewski AS. A nonlinear effect of
hyperglycemia and current cigarette smoking are
major determinants of the onset of micro-
albuminuria in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 2001;
50:2842–2849
278. Chaffee
BW,
Watkins
SL,
Glantz
SA.
Electronic cigarette use and progression from
experimentation to established smoking. Pediatrics
2018;141:e20173594
279. Audrain-McGovern J, Stone MD, Barrington-
Trimis J, Unger JB, Leventhal AM. Adolescent E-
cigarette, hookah, and conventional cigarette use
and subsequent marijuana use. Pediatrics 2018;
142:e20173616
280. Weitzman ER, Wisk LE, Minegishi M, et al.
Effects of a patient-centered intervention to
S280
Children and Adolescents
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

reduce alcohol use among youth with chronic
medical conditions. J Adolesc Health 2022;71
(4S):S24–S33
281. Arnett JJ. Emerging adulthood. A theory of
development from the late teens through the
twenties. Am Psychol 2000;55:469–480
282. Weissberg-Benchell J, Wolpert H, Anderson
BJ. Transitioning from pediatric to adult care: a
new approach to the post-adolescent young
person with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care
2007;30:2441–2446
283. Peters
A,
Laffel
L;
American
Diabetes
Association Transitions Working Group. Diabetes
care for emerging adults: recommendations for
transition from pediatric to adult diabetes care
systems: a position statement of the American
Diabetes Association, with representation by the
American College of Osteopathic Family Physicians,
the American Academy of Pediatrics, the American
Association
of
Clinical
Endocrinologists,
the
American Osteopathic Association, the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Children with
Diabetes, The Endocrine Society, the International
Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes,
Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation Inter-
national, the National Diabetes Education Program,
and the Pediatric Endocrine Society (formerly
Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society). Dia-
betes Care 2011;34:2477–2485
284. Bryden KS, Peveler RC, Stein A, Neil A,
Mayou RA, Dunger DB. Clinical and psychological
course of diabetes from adolescence to young
adulthood: a longitudinal cohort study. Diabetes
Care 2001;24:1536–1540
285. Kapellen TM, M€uther S, Schwandt A, et al.;
DPV initiative and the Competence Network
Diabetes Mellitus funded by the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research. Transition to
adult diabetes care in Germany—high risk for
acute complications and declining metabolic
control during the transition phase. Pediatr Dia-
betes 2018;19:1094–1099
286. Agarwal S, Raymond JK, Isom S, et al.
Transfer from paediatric to adult care for young
adults with type 2 diabetes: the SEARCH for
Diabetes in Youth Study. Diabet Med 2018;35:
504–512
287. Laing SP, Jones ME, Swerdlow AJ, Burden
AC, Gatling W. Psychosocial and socioeconomic
risk factors for premature death in young people
with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2005;28:
1618–1623
288. Mays JA, Jackson KL, Derby TA, et al. An
evaluation of recurrent diabetic ketoacidosis,
fragmentation of care, and mortality across
Chicago, Illinois. Diabetes Care 2016;39:1671–
1676
289. Lotstein DS, Seid M, Klingensmith G, et al.;
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study Group.
Transition from pediatric to adult care for youth
diagnosed with type 1 diabetes in adolescence.
Pediatrics 2013;131:e1062–e1070
290. Lyons SK, Becker DJ, Helgeson VS. Transfer
from pediatric to adult health care: effects on
diabetes outcomes. Pediatr Diabetes 2014;15:
10–17
291. Garvey KC, Foster NC, Agarwal S, et al.
Health care transition preparation and experiences
in a U.S. national sample of young adults with
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2017;40:317–324
292. The Endocrine Society. Transitions of Care.
Accessed 1 October 2023. Available from https://
www.endocrine.org/improving-practice/transitions
#t1d
293. D’Amico
RP,
Pian
TM,
Buschur
EO.
Transition from pediatric to adult care for
individuals with type 1 diabetes: opportunities
and challenges. Endocr Pract 2023;29:279–285
294. Xie LF, Housni
A, Nakhla M, et al.
Adaptation of an adult web application for type 1
diabetes self-management to youth using the
behavior change wheel to tailor the needs of
health
care
transition:
qualitative
interview
study. JMIR Diabetes 2023;8:e42564
295. Butalia S, Crawford SG, McGuire KA, Dyjur
DK, Mercer JR, Pacaud D. Improved transition to
adult care in youth with type 1 diabetes: a
pragmatic clinical trial. Diabetologia 2021;64:
758–766
296. Reid MW, Krishnan S, Berget C, et al.
CoYoT1 clinic: home telemedicine increases
young adult engagement in diabetes care. Dia-
betes Technol Ther 2018;20:370–379
297. Spaic T, Robinson T, Goldbloom E, et al.;
JDRF Canadian Clinical Trial CCTN1102 Study
Group. Closing the gap: results of the multicenter
Canadian randomized controlled trial of structured
transition in young adults with type 1 diabetes.
Diabetes Care 2019;42:1018–1026
298. White M, O’Connell MA, Cameron FJ. Clinic
attendance and disengagement of young adults
with type 1 diabetes after transition of care from
paediatric to adult services (TrACeD): a randomised,
open-label, controlled trial. Lancet Child Adolesc
Health 2017;1:274–283
299. Schultz AT, Smaldone A. Components of
interventions that improve transitions to adult
care for adolescents with type 1 diabetes. J
Adolesc Health 2017;60:133–146
300. Sequeira PA, Pyatak EA, Weigensberg MJ,
et al. Let’s empower and prepare (LEAP):
evaluation of a structured transition program for
young adults with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care
2015;38:1412–1419
301. Monaghan M, Baumann K.Type 1 diabetes:
addressing the transition from pediatric to adult-
oriented health care. Res Rep Endocr Disord
2016;6:31–40
302. Carreon SA, Duran B, Tang TS, et al. Here
for you: a review of social support research in
young adults with diabetes. Diabetes Spectr
2021;34:363–370
diabetesjournals.org/care
Children and Adolescents
S281
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

15. Management of Diabetes in
Pregnancy: Standards of Care in
Diabetes—2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S282–S294 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S015
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes
the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the
components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to
evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee, an
interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of
Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA
standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s
clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee
members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to com-
ment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
DIABETES IN PREGNANCY
The prevalence of diabetes in pregnancy has been increasing in the U.S. in parallel
with the worldwide epidemic of obesity. Not only is the prevalence of type 1 diabetes
and type 2 diabetes increasing in individuals of reproductive age, but there is also a
dramatic increase in the reported rates of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). Diabe-
tes confers signiﬁcantly greater maternal and fetal risk largely related to the degree of
hyperglycemia but also related to chronic complications and comorbidities of diabe-
tes. In general, speciﬁc risks of diabetes in pregnancy include spontaneous abortion,
fetal anomalies, preeclampsia, fetal demise, macrosomia, neonatal hypoglycemia, neo-
natal hyperbilirubinemia, and neonatal respiratory distress syndrome, among others.
In addition, diabetes in pregnancy increases the risks of obesity, hypertension, and
type 2 diabetes in offspring later in life (1,2).
Preconception Counseling
Recommendations
15.1 Starting at puberty and continuing in all people with diabetes and child-
bearing potential, preconception counseling should be incorporated into rou-
tine diabetes care. A
15.2 Family planning should be discussed, and effective contraception (with con-
sideration of long-acting, reversible contraception) should be prescribed and used
until an individual’s treatment plan and A1C are optimized for pregnancy. A
15.3 Preconception counseling should address the importance of achieving
glucose levels as close to normal as is safely possible, ideally A1C <6.5%
(<48 mmol/mol), to reduce the risk of congenital anomalies, preeclampsia,
macrosomia, preterm birth, and other complications. A
*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee. 15. Manage-
ment of diabetes in pregnancy: Standards of Care in
Diabetes—2024. Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):
S282–S294
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
15. MANAGEMENT OF DIABETES IN PREGNANCY
S282
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

All individuals with diabetes and childbear-
ing potential should be informed about
the importance of achieving and maintain-
ing as near euglycemia as safely possible
prior to conception and throughout preg-
nancy. Observational studies show an
increased risk of diabetic embryopathy,
especially
anencephaly,
microcephaly,
congenital heart disease, renal anoma-
lies, and caudal regression, directly pro-
portional to elevations in A1C during the
ﬁrst 10 weeks of pregnancy (3). Although
observational studies are confounded by
the association between elevated peri-
conceptional A1C and other engagement
in self-care behaviors, the quantity and
consistency of data are convincing and
support the recommendation to opti-
mize glycemia prior to conception with
an A1C <6.5% (<48 mmol/mol), as this
is associated with the lowest risk of con-
genital anomalies (given that organogen-
esis occurs primarily at 5–8 weeks of
gestation), preeclampsia, and preterm
birth (3–7). In a systematic review and
meta-analysis of observational studies,
preconception care for pregnant individ-
uals with preexisting diabetes was asso-
ciated with lower A1C and reduced risks
of birth defects, preterm delivery, peri-
natal mortality, small-for-gestational-age
births, and neonatal intensive care unit
admissions (8).
There are opportunities at any health
care visit to educate all adults and ado-
lescents with diabetes and childbearing
potential about the risks of unplanned
pregnancies and about improved mater-
nal and fetal outcomes with pregnancy
planning (9). Education and counseling
should be offered, even when individu-
als already use contraception or do not
intend to conceive. Effective preconcep-
tion counseling could avert substantial
health and associated cost (10) burdens
in the offspring (11). Family planning
should be discussed, including the bene-
ﬁts of long-acting, reversible contracep-
tion, and effective contraception should
be prescribed and used until the individ-
ual is prepared and ready to become
pregnant (12–16).
To minimize the occurrence of com-
plications, beginning at the onset of
puberty or at diagnosis, all adults and
adolescents with diabetes of childbear-
ing potential should receive education
about 1) the risks of malformations
associated with unplanned pregnancies
and even with mild hyperglycemia and
2) the use of effective contraception at
all times when trying to prevent a preg-
nancy. Preconception counseling using
developmentally appropriate educational
tools enables adolescent girls to make
well-informed decisions (9). Preconcep-
tion counseling resources tailored for
adolescents are available at no cost
through the American Diabetes Associ-
ation (ADA) (17).
Preconception Care
Recommendations
15.4 Individuals with preexisting diabe-
tes who are planning a pregnancy
should ideally begin receiving interpro-
fessional care for preconception, which
includes an endocrinology health care
professional, maternal-fetal medicine
specialist, registered dietitian nutrition-
ist, and diabetes care and education
specialist, when available. B
15.5 In addition to focused attention
on achieving glycemic targets, A stan-
dard preconception care should be
augmented with extra focus on nutri-
tion, physical activity, diabetes self-
care education, and screening for
diabetes comorbidities and compli-
cations. B
15.6 Individuals with preexisting type 1
or type 2 diabetes who are planning a
pregnancy or who have become preg-
nant should be counseled on the risk
of development and/or progression
of diabetic retinopathy. Dilated eye
examinations should occur ideally
before pregnancy or in the ﬁrst tri-
mester, and then pregnant indivi-
duals should be monitored every
trimester and for 1 year postpartum
as indicated by the degree of reti-
nopathy and as recommended by
the eye care health care profes-
sional. B
The importance of preconception care
for all pregnant people is highlighted by
American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (ACOG) Committee Opinion
762, “Prepregnancy Counseling” (10). Pre-
conception counseling for pregnant peo-
ple with preexisting type 1 or type 2
diabetes is highly effective in reducing
the risk of congenital malformations
and decreasing the risk of preterm deliv-
ery and admission to neonatal intensive
care units. Preconception counseling is
also associated with reductions in perina-
tal mortality and small-for-gestational-age
birth weight (18). A key point is the
need to incorporate a question about
plans for pregnancy into the routine pri-
mary and gynecologic care of people
with diabetes. Preconception care for
people with diabetes should include the
standard screening and care recom-
mended for any person planning preg-
nancy (10). Prescription of prenatal
vitamins with at least 400 mg of folic
acid (10) and 150 mg of potassium io-
dide (19) is recommended prior to con-
ception. Review and counseling on the
abstinence of use of nicotine products,
alcohol, and recreational drugs, includ-
ing marijuana, is important. Standard
care includes
screening for sexually
transmitted diseases and thyroid dis-
ease, recommended vaccinations, rou-
tine genetic screening, a careful review
of all prescription and nonprescription
medications, herbal supplements, and
nonherbal supplements used, and a re-
view of travel history and plans with
special attention to areas known to
have Zika virus, as outlined by ACOG.
See Table 15.1 for additional details on
elements of preconception care (10,20).
Counseling on the speciﬁc risks of
obesity in pregnancy and lifestyle inter-
ventions to prevent and treat obesity,
including referral to a registered dieti-
tian nutritionist (RDN), is recommended
(21).
Diabetes-speciﬁc
counseling
should
include an explanation of the risks to
mother and fetus related to pregnancies
associated with diabetes and the ways
to reduce risks, including glycemic goal
setting, lifestyle and behavioral man-
agement, and medical nutrition therapy
(18). The most important diabetes-
speciﬁc component of preconception
care is the attainment of glycemic
goals prior to conception. In addition,
the presence of microvascular compli-
cations is associated with higher risk of
disease progression and adverse preg-
nancy outcomes (22). Diabetes-speciﬁc
testing should include A1C, creatinine, and
urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio. Special
attention should be paid to the review of
the medication list for potentially harmful
drugs, i.e., ACE inhibitors (23,24), angio-
tensin receptor blockers (23), and statins
(24,25). A referral for a comprehensive
eye exam is recommended. Individuals
diabetesjournals.org/care
Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy
S283
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

with preexisting diabetic retinopathy
will need close monitoring during preg-
nancy to assess stability or progression
of retinopathy and provide treatment if
indicated (26).
GLYCEMIC GOALS IN PREGNANCY
Recommendations
15.7 Fasting, preprandial, and postpran-
dial blood glucose monitoring are rec-
ommended in individuals with diabetes
in pregnancy to achieve optimal glucose
levels. Glucose goals are fasting plasma
glucose <95 mg/dL (<5.3 mmol/L)
and either 1-h postprandial glucose
<140 mg/dL (<7.8 mmol/L) or 2-h
postprandial glucose <120 mg/dL
(<6.7 mmol/L). B
15.8 Due to increased red blood cell
turnover, A1C is slightly lower during
pregnancy in people with and with-
out diabetes. Ideally, the A1C goal in
pregnancy is <6% (<42 mmol/mol)
if this can be achieved without signiﬁ-
cant hypoglycemia, but the goal may
be relaxed to <7% (<53 mmol/mol) if
necessary to prevent hypoglycemia. B
15.9 When used in addition to pre-
and postprandial blood glucose moni-
toring, continuous glucose monitoring
(CGM) can help to achieve the A1C
goal in diabetes and pregnancy. B
15.10 CGM is recommended in preg-
nancies associated with type 1 diabe-
tes. A When used in addition to blood
glucose monitoring, achieving tradi-
tional pre- and postprandial goals,
real-time CGM can reduce the risk for
large-for-gestational age infants and
neonatal hypoglycemia in pregnancy
complicated by type 1 diabetes. A
15.11 CGM metrics may be used in
addition to but should not be used as
a substitute for blood glucose moni-
toring to achieve optimal pre- and
postprandial glycemic goals. E
15.12 Commonly used estimated A1C
and glucose management indicator cal-
culations should not be used in preg-
nancy as estimates of A1C. C
15.13 Nutrition counseling should
endorse a balance of macronutrients
including nutrient-dense fruits, vege-
tables, legumes, whole grains, and
healthy fats with n-3 fatty acids that
include nuts and seeds and ﬁsh in
the eating pattern. E
Table 15.1—Checklist for preconception care for people with diabetes
Preconception education should include:
w Comprehensive nutrition assessment and recommendations for:
 Overweight/obesity or underweight
 Meal planning
 Correction of dietary nutritional deﬁciencies
 Caffeine intake
 Safe food preparation technique
w Lifestyle recommendations for:
 Regular moderate exercise
 Avoidance of hyperthermia (hot tubs)
 Adequate sleep
w Comprehensive diabetes self-management education
w Counseling on diabetes in pregnancy per current standards, including: natural history of
insulin resistance in pregnancy and postpartum; preconception glycemic goals; avoidance of
DKA/severe hyperglycemia; avoidance of severe hypoglycemia; progression of retinopathy;
PCOS (if applicable); fertility in people with diabetes; genetics of diabetes; risks to
pregnancy including miscarriage, still birth, congenital malformations, macrosomia, preterm
labor and delivery, hypertensive disorders in pregnancy, etc.
w Supplementation
 Folic acid supplement (400 mg routine)
 Appropriate use of over-the-counter medications and supplements
Health assessment and plan should include:
w General evaluation of overall health
w Evaluation of diabetes and its comorbidities and complications, including DKA/severe
hyperglycemia; severe hypoglycemia/hypoglycemia unawareness; barriers to care;
comorbidities such as hyperlipidemia, hypertension, NAFLD, PCOS, and thyroid
dysfunction; complications such as macrovascular disease, nephropathy, neuropathy
(including autonomic bowel and bladder dysfunction), and retinopathy
w Evaluation of obstetric/gynecologic history, including a history of cesarean section,
congenital malformations or fetal loss, current methods of contraception, hypertensive
disorders of pregnancy, postpartum hemorrhage, preterm delivery, previous
macrosomia, Rh incompatibility, and thrombotic events (DVT/PE)
w Review of current medications and appropriateness during pregnancy
Screening should include:
w Diabetes complications and comorbidities, including comprehensive foot exam;
comprehensive ophthalmologic exam; ECG in individuals starting at age 35 years who
have cardiac signs/symptoms or risk factors and, if abnormal, further evaluation; lipid
panel; serum creatinine; TSH; and urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio
w Anemia
w Genetic carrier status (based on history):
 Cystic ﬁbrosis
 Sickle cell anemia
 Tay-Sachs disease
 Thalassemia
 Others if indicated
w Infectious disease
 Neisseria gonorrhoeae/Chlamydia trachomatis
 Hepatitis B and hepatitis C
 HIV
 Pap smear
 Syphilis
Immunizations should include:
w Inactivated inﬂuenza
w Tdap (tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis)
w COVID-19 (certain populations)
w Hepatitis A and hepatitis B (certain populations)
w Others if indicated
Preconception plan should include:
w Nutrition and medication plan to achieve glycemic goals prior to conception, including appropriate
implementation of monitoring, continuous glucose monitoring, and pump technology
w Contraceptive plan to prevent pregnancy until glycemic goals are achieved
w Management plan for general health, gynecologic concerns, comorbid conditions, or
complications, if present, including hypertension, nephropathy, retinopathy; Rh
incompatibility; and thyroid dysfunction
Created using information from American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (10) and Ra-
mos (20). COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019; DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis; DVT/PE, deep vein
thrombosis/pulmonary embolism; ECG, electrocardiogram; NAFLD, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease;
PCOS, polycystic ovary syndrome; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
S284
Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Pregnancy in people with normal glu-
cose metabolism is characterized by
fasting levels of blood glucose that are
lower than in the nonpregnant state
due to insulin-independent glucose up-
take by the fetus and placenta and by
mild postprandial hyperglycemia and
carbohydrate intolerance as a result of
diabetogenic placental factors. In peo-
ple with preexisting diabetes, glycemic
goals are usually achieved through a
combination of insulin administration
and medical nutrition therapy. Because
glycemic goals in pregnancy are stricter
than in nonpregnant individuals, it is
important that pregnant people with dia-
betes eat consistent amounts of carbo-
hydrates to match with insulin dosage
and to avoid hyperglycemia or hypogly-
cemia. Referral to an RDN is important
to establish a food plan and insulin-to-
carbohydrate ratio and determine weight
gain goals. The quality of the carbohy-
drates should be evaluated. A subgroup
analysis of the Continuous Glucose Mon-
itoring in Pregnant Women With Type 1
Diabetes Trial (CONCEPTT) study demon-
strated that the diets of individuals plan-
ning pregnancy and currently pregnant
assessed during the run-in phase prior
to randomization were characterized by
high-fat, low-ﬁber, and poor-quality car-
bohydrate intakes. Fruit and vegetable
consumption was inadequate, with one
in four participants at risk for micronutri-
ent deﬁciencies, highlighting the impor-
tance of medical nutrition therapy (27).
An expert panel on nutrition in preg-
nancy recommends a balance of macro-
nutrients. A diet that severely restricts
any macronutrient class should be avoided,
speciﬁcally the ketogenic diet that lacks
carbohydrates, the Paleo diet because of
dairy restriction, and any diet characterized
by excess saturated fats. Nutrient-dense,
whole foods are recommended, includ-
ing fruits, vegetables, legumes, whole
grains, and healthy fats with n-3 fatty
acids that include nuts and seeds and
ﬁsh, which are less likely to promote ex-
cessive weight gain. Processed foods,
fatty red meat, and sweetened foods
and beverages should be limited (28).
Insulin Physiology
Given that early pregnancy may be a
time of enhanced insulin sensitivity and
lower glucose levels, many people with
type 1 diabetes will have lower insulin re-
quirements and an increased risk for
hypoglycemia (29). At around 16 weeks,
insulin resistance begins to increase, and
total daily insulin doses increase linearly
5% per week through week 36. This
usually results in a doubling of daily insu-
lin dose compared with the prepregnancy
requirement. While there is an increase in
both basal and bolus insulin requirements,
bolus insulin requirements take up a larger
proportion of overall total daily insulin
needs in individuals with preexisting diabe-
tes as pregnancy progresses (30,31). The
insulin requirement levels off toward the
end of the third trimester. A rapid reduc-
tion in insulin requirements can indicate
the development of placental insufﬁciency
(32). In people with normal pancreatic
function, insulin production is sufﬁcient to
meet the challenge of this physiological in-
sulin resistance and to maintain normal
glucose levels. However, in people with di-
abetes, hyperglycemia occurs if treatment
is not adjusted appropriately.
Glucose Monitoring
Reﬂecting this physiology, fasting and
postprandial blood glucose monitoring
is recommended to achieve metabolic
control in pregnant people with diabe-
tes. Preprandial testing is also recom-
mended when using insulin pumps or
basal-bolus therapy so that premeal
rapid-acting insulin dosage can be ad-
justed. Postprandial monitoring is asso-
ciated with better glycemic outcomes
and a lower risk of preeclampsia (32–34).
There are no adequately powered ran-
domized trials comparing different fasting
and postmeal glycemic goals for pre-
existing diabetes in pregnancy.
Similar to the targets recommended
by ACOG (upper limits are the same as
for GDM, described below) (35), the
ADA-recommended targets for pregnant
people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes
are as follows:
• Fasting glucose 70–95 mg/dL (3.9–5.3
mmol/L) and either
• One-hour postprandial glucose 110–140
mg/dL (6.1–7.8 mmol/L) or
• Two-hour postprandial glucose 100–120
mg/dL (5.6–6.7 mmol/L)
Lower limits are based on the mean
of normal blood glucose in pregnancy
(36). Lower limits do not apply to indi-
viduals with type 2 diabetes treated
with nutrition alone. Hypoglycemia in
pregnancy is as deﬁned and treated in Rec-
ommendations 6.11–6.17 (see Section 6,
“Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia”). The
most appropriate hypoglycemia threshold
level in pregnancy has not been validated
but has ranged from <60 to <70 mg/dL
(<3.3 to <3.9 mmol/L) in the past.
Current recommendations for hypogly-
cemia thresholds include blood glucose
<70 mg/dL (<3.9 mmol/L) and sensor
glucose <63 mg/dL (<3.5 mmol/L)
(36,37). These fasting/premeal and post-
prandial glucose values represent opti-
mal levels if they can be achieved safely.
In practice, it may be challenging for a
person with type 1 diabetes to achieve
these goals without hypoglycemia, par-
ticularly those with a history of recurrent
hypoglycemia or hypoglycemia unaware-
ness. If an individual cannot achieve
these goals without signiﬁcant hypogly-
cemia, the ADA suggests less stringent
goals based on clinical experience and
individualization of care.
A1C in Pregnancy
In studies of individuals without preex-
isting diabetes, increasing A1C levels
within the normal range are associated
with adverse outcomes (38). In the
Hyperglycemia and Adverse Pregnancy
Outcome (HAPO) study, increasing levels
of glycemia were also associated with
worsening outcomes (39). Observational
studies in preexisting diabetes and preg-
nancy show the lowest rates of adverse
fetal outcomes in association with A1C
<6–6.5% (<42–48 mmol/mol) early in
gestation (4–6,40). Clinical trials have
not evaluated the risks and beneﬁts of
achieving these goals, and treatment
goals should account for the risk of ma-
ternal hypoglycemia in setting an individ-
ualized goal of <6% (<42 mmol/mol) to
<7% (<53 mmol/mol). Due to physiolog-
ical increases in red blood cell turnover,
A1C levels fall during normal pregnancy
(41,42). Additionally, as A1C represents
an integrated measure of glucose, it may
not fully capture postprandial hyperglyce-
mia, which drives macrosomia. Thus, al-
though A1C may be useful, it should be
used as a secondary measure of glycemic
outcomes in pregnancy, after blood glu-
cose monitoring.
In the second and third trimesters, A1C
<6% (<42 mmol/mol) has the lowest
risk of large-for-gestational-age infants
(40,43,44), preterm delivery (45), and
diabetesjournals.org/care
Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy
S285
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

preeclampsia (1,46). Taking all of this into
account, a goal of <6% (<42 mmol/mol)
is optimal during pregnancy if it can be
achieved without signiﬁcant hypoglyce-
mia. The A1C goal in a given individual
should be achieved without hypoglyce-
mia, which, in addition to the usual ad-
verse sequelae, may increase the risk of
low birth weight (47,48). Given the alter-
ation in red blood cell kinetics during
pregnancy and physiological changes in
glycemic parameters, A1C levels may
need to be monitored more frequently
than usual (e.g., monthly).
Continuous Glucose Monitoring in
Pregnancy
CONCEPTT was a randomized controlled
trial (RCT) of real-time continuous glu-
cose monitoring (CGM) in addition to
standard care, including optimization of
pre- and postprandial glucose goals ver-
sus standard care for pregnant people
with type 1 diabetes. It demonstrated
the value of real-time CGM in pregnancy
complicated by type 1 diabetes by show-
ing a mild improvement in A1C and a
signiﬁcant improvement in the maternal
glucose time in range (TIR), without an
increase in hypoglycemia, and reductions
in large-for-gestational-age births, length
of infant hospital stays, and severe
neonatal hypoglycemia (49). An obser-
vational cohort study that evaluated
the glycemic variables reported using
CGM systems found that lower mean
glucose, lower standard deviation, and a
higher percentage of time in range were
associated with lower risks of large-for-
gestational-age births and other adverse
neonatal outcomes (50). Data from one
study suggest that the use of the CGM-
reported mean glucose is superior to the
use of estimated A1C, glucose manage-
ment indicator, and other calculations to
estimate A1C, given the changes to
A1C that occur in pregnancy (51). CGM
TIR can be used for assessment of gly-
cemic outcomes in people with type 1
diabetes, but it does not provide action-
able data to address fasting and post-
prandial hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia.
The cost of CGM in pregnancies compli-
cated by type 1 diabetes is offset by im-
proved maternal and neonatal outcomes
(52).
There are insufﬁcient data to support
the use of CGM in all people with type 2
diabetes or GDM (53,54). The decision of
whether
to
use
CGM
in
pregnant
individuals with type 2 diabetes or GDM
should be individualized based on treat-
ment regimen, circumstances, preferen-
ces, and needs.
The international consensus on TIR
(37) endorses pregnancy target ranges
and goals for TIR for people with type 1
diabetes using CGM as reported on the
ambulatory glucose proﬁle; however, it
does not specify the type or accuracy of
the device or need for alarms and alerts.
A prospective, observational study in-
cluding 20 pregnant people with type 1
diabetes simultaneously monitored with
intermittently scanning CGM (isCGM) and
real-time CGM (rtCGM) for 7 days in
early pregnancy demonstrated a higher
percentage of time-below-range in the
isCGM group. Asymptomatic hypoglyce-
mia measured by isCGM should therefore
not necessarily lead to a reduction of in-
sulin dose and/or increased carbohydrate
intake at bedtime unless these episodes
are conﬁrmed by blood glucose meter
measurements (55). Selection of CGM
device should be based on an individual’s
circumstances, preferences, and needs.
• Targetsensorglucoserange63–140mg/dL
(3.5–7.8mmol/L):TIR,goal>70%
• Time below range (<63 mg/dL [<3.5
mmol/L]): level 1 TBR, goal <4%
• Time below range (<54 mg/dL [<3.0
mmol/L]): level 2 TBR, goal <1%
• Time above range (>140 mg/dL [>7.8
mmol/L]): TAR, goal <25%
The international consensus on TIR
(37) endorsed the same sensor glucose
target ranges for individuals with type 2
diabetes in pregnancy and GDM but
could not quantify the goal of amount
of time spent within each category be-
cause of insufﬁcient data.
MANAGEMENT OF GESTATIONAL
DIABETES MELLITUS
Recommendations
15.14 Lifestyle behavior change is an
essential component of management
of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM)
and may sufﬁce as treatment for many
individuals. Insulin should be added if
needed to achieve glycemic goals. A
15.15 Insulin is the preferred medica-
tion for treating hyperglycemia in
GDM. Metformin and glyburide, indi-
vidually or in combination, should not
be used as ﬁrst-line agents, as both
cross the placenta to the fetus. A
Other oral and noninsulin injectable
glucose-lowering medications lack long-
term safety data. E
15.16 Metformin, when used to treat
polycystic ovary syndrome and induce
ovulation, should be discontinued by
the end of the ﬁrst trimester. A
15.17 Telehealth visits used in combi-
nation with in-person visits for preg-
nant people with GDM can improve
outcomes compared with standard in-
person care alone. A
GDM is characterized by an increased risk
of large-for-gestational-age birth weight
and neonatal and pregnancy complica-
tions and an increased risk of long-term
maternal type 2 diabetes and abnormal
glucose metabolism of offspring in child-
hood. These associations with maternal
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) results
are continuous with no clear inﬂection
points (39,56). Offspring with exposure
to untreated GDM have reduced insulin
sensitivity and b-cell compensation and
are more likely to have impaired glucose
tolerance in childhood (57). In other words,
short-term and long-term risks increase
with progressive maternal hyperglycemia.
Therefore, all pregnant people should
be screened as outlined in Section 2,
“Diagnosis and Classiﬁcation of Diabetes.”
Although there is some heterogeneity,
many RCTs and a Cochrane review suggest
that the risk of GDM may be reduced by
diet, exercise, and lifestyle counseling, par-
ticularly when interventions are started
during the ﬁrst or early in the second tri-
mester (58–60). There are no intervention
trials in offspring of mothers with GDM. A
meta-analysis of 11 RCTs demonstrated
that metformin treatment in pregnancy
does not reduce the risk of GDM in high-
risk individuals with obesity, polycystic ovary
syndrome, or preexisting insulin resistance
(61). A meta-analysis of 32 RCTs evaluating
the effectiveness of telemedicine interven-
tions, which ranged from telemedicine visits
to the use of health apps, used in combina-
tion with in-person visits for GDM demon-
strated reduced incidences of cesarean
delivery, premature rupture of membranes,
pregnancy-induced hypertension or pre-
eclampsia, preterm birth, neonatal asphyxia,
and polyhydramnios compared with stan-
dard in-person care alone (62).
S286
Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Lifestyle and Behavioral Management
After diagnosis, treatment starts with
medical nutrition therapy, physical activ-
ity, and weight management, depending
on pregestational weight, as outlined in
the section below on preexisting type 2
diabetes, as well as glucose monitoring
aiming for the goals recommended by the
Fifth International Workshop-Conference
on Gestational Diabetes Mellitus (63):
• Fastingglucose<95mg/dL(<5.3mmol/L)
andeither
• One-hour postprandial glucose <140
mg/dL (<7.8 mmol/L) or
• Two-hour postprandial glucose <120
mg/dL (<6.7 mmol/L)
The glycemic goal lower limits deﬁned
above for preexisting diabetes apply for
GDM treated with insulin. Depending
on the population, studies suggest that
70–85% of people diagnosed with GDM
under Carpenter-Coustan criteria can
manage GDM with lifestyle modiﬁcation
alone; it is anticipated that this propor-
tion will be even higher if the lower In-
ternational Association of the Diabetes
and Pregnancy Study Groups (64) diag-
nostic thresholds are used.
Medical Nutrition Therapy
Medical nutrition therapy for GDM is an
individualized nutrition plan developed
between the pregnant person and an
RDN familiar with the management of
GDM (65,66). The food plan should
provide adequate calorie intake to pro-
mote fetal/neonatal and maternal health,
achieve glycemic goals, and promote ap-
propriate weight gain, according to the
2009 National Academy of Medicine rec-
ommendations (67). There is no deﬁnitive
research that identiﬁes a speciﬁc optimal
calorie intake for people with GDM or
suggests that their calorie needs are dif-
ferent from those of pregnant individuals
without GDM. The food plan should be
based on a nutrition assessment with di-
etary reference intake guidance from
the National Academy of Medicine.
The recommended dietary reference
intake for all pregnant people is a mini-
mum of 175 g of carbohydrate (35% of
a 2,000-calorie diet), a minimum of 71 g
of protein, and 28 g of ﬁber (68). The nu-
trition plan should emphasize monoun-
saturated and polyunsaturated fats while
limiting saturated fats and avoiding trans
fats. As is true for all nutrition therapy in
people with diabetes, the amount and
type
of
carbohydrate
will
impact
glucose levels. Promoting higher-quality,
nutrient-dense carbohydrates results in
controlled fasting/postprandial glucose,
lower free fatty acids, improved insulin
action, and vascular beneﬁts and may re-
duce excess infant adiposity. Individuals
who substitute fat for carbohydrates may
unintentionally enhance lipolysis, promote
elevated free fatty acids, and worsen ma-
ternal insulin resistance (69,70). Fasting
urine ketone testing may be useful to
identify those who are severely restrict-
ing carbohydrates to manage blood glu-
cose. Simple carbohydrates will result in
higher postmeal excursions.
Physical Activity
A systematic review demonstrated im-
provements in glucose outcomes and re-
ductions in need to start insulin or insulin
dose requirements with an exercise inter-
vention. There was heterogeneity in the
types of effective exercise (aerobic, resis-
tance, or both) and duration of exercise
(20–50 min/day, 2–7 days/week of mod-
erate intensity) (71).
Pharmacologic Therapy
Treatment of GDM with lifestyle and in-
sulin has been demonstrated to im-
prove perinatal outcomes in two large
randomized studies, as summarized in a
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force re-
view (72). Insulin is the ﬁrst-line agent
recommended for the treatment of
GDM in the U.S. While individual RCTs
support limited efﬁcacy of metformin
(73,74) and glyburide (75) in reducing
glucose levels for the treatment of
GDM, these agents are not recom-
mended as the ﬁrst-line treatment for
GDM because they are known to cross
the placenta and data on long-term
safety for offspring is of some concern
(35). Furthermore, in separate RCTs, gly-
buride and metformin failed to provide
adequate glycemic outcomes in 23%
and 25–28% of participants with GDM,
respectively (76,77).
Sulfonylureas
Sulfonylureas are known to cross the
placenta and have been associated with
increased neonatal hypoglycemia. Con-
centrations of glyburide in umbilical cord
plasma are approximately 50–70% of
maternal levels (76,77). In meta-analyses
and systematic reviews, glyburide was
associated with a higher rate of neonatal
hypoglycemia, macrosomia, and increased
neonatal abdominal circumference than
insulin or metformin (78,79).
Glyburide failed to be found noninfe-
rior to insulin based on a composite
outcome of neonatal hypoglycemia, mac-
rosomia, and hyperbilirubinemia (80).
Long-term safety data for offspring ex-
posed to glyburide are not available (80).
Metformin
Metformin was associated with a lower
risk of neonatal hypoglycemia and less
maternal weight gain than insulin in sys-
tematic reviews and RCTs (78,81–83).
However, metformin readily crosses the
placenta, resulting in umbilical cord
blood levels of metformin as high or
higher than simultaneous maternal lev-
els (84,85). In the Metformin in Gesta-
tional Diabetes: The Offspring Follow-
Up (MiG TOFU) study’s analyses of 7- to
9-year-old offspring, the 9-year-old off-
spring exposed to metformin for the
treatment of GDM in the Auckland co-
hort were heavier and had a higher
waist-to-height ratio and waist circum-
ference than those exposed to insulin
(86). This difference was not found in
the Adelaide cohort. In one RCT of met-
formin use in pregnancy for polycystic
ovary syndrome, follow-up of 4-year-old
offspring demonstrated higher BMI and
increased obesity in the offspring ex-
posed to metformin (87). A follow-up
study at 5–10 years showed that the
offspring had higher BMI, weight-to-
height
ratios,
waist
circumferences,
and a borderline increase in fat mass
(88,89). A meta-analysis demonstrated
that metformin exposure resulted in
smaller neonates with an acceleration
of postnatal growth, resulting in higher
BMI in childhood (88). Follow-up of off-
spring from the Metformin in Women
with Type 2 Diabetes in Pregnancy
(MiTy Kids) trial showed no differ-
ences in anthropometrics of children
at 24 months (90).
Randomized, double-blind, controlled
trials comparing metformin with other
therapies for ovulation induction in indi-
viduals with polycystic ovary syndrome
have not demonstrated beneﬁt in pre-
venting spontaneous abortion or GDM
(91), and there is no evidence-based
need to continue metformin in these in-
dividuals (92–94).
diabetesjournals.org/care
Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy
S287
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

There are some people with GDM re-
quiring medical therapy who may not be
able to use insulin safely or effectively
during pregnancy due to cost, language
barriers, comprehension, or cultural in-
ﬂuences. Oral agents may be an alterna-
tive for these individuals after discussing
the known risks and the need for more
long-term safety data in offspring. How-
ever, due to the potential for growth re-
striction or acidosis in the setting of
placental insufﬁciency, metformin should
not be used in pregnant people with hy-
pertension or preeclampsia or those at
risk for intrauterine growth restriction
(90,95,96).
Insulin
Insulin use should follow the guidelines
below. Both multiple daily insulin injec-
tions and continuous subcutaneous in-
sulin infusion are reasonable delivery
strategies, and neither has been shown
to be superior to the other during preg-
nancy (97).
MANAGEMENT OF PREEXISTING
TYPE 1 DIABETES AND TYPE 2
DIABETES IN PREGNANCY
Recommendations
15.18 Insulin should be used to man-
age type 1 diabetes in pregnancy. A
Insulin is the preferred agent for the
management of type 2 diabetes in
pregnancy. B
15.19 Either multiple daily injections
or insulin pump technology can be
used in pregnancy complicated by
type 1 diabetes. C
The physiology of pregnancy necessitates
frequent titration of insulin to match
changing requirements and underscores
the importance of daily and frequent
blood glucose monitoring. Due to the
complexity of insulin management in
pregnancy, referral to a specialized cen-
ter offering team-based care (with team
members including a maternal-fetal med-
icine specialist, endocrinologist or other
health care professional experienced in
managing pregnancy and preexisting dia-
betes, RDN, diabetes care and education
specialist, and social worker, as needed) is
recommended if this resource is available.
When a single specialized center is not
available, providing a interprofessional
team approach through interprofessional
team members at different centers may
still be beneﬁcial.
None of the currently available human
insulin preparations have been demon-
strated to cross the placenta (93–98).
Insulins studied in RCTs are preferred
(97,99–103) over those studied in cohort
studies (104), which are preferred over
those studied in case reports only.
While many health care professionals
prefer insulin pumps in pregnancy, it is
not clear that they are superior to multi-
ple daily injections (105,106). None of
the current automated insulin delivery
(AID) systems approved by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) have al-
gorithms set to achieve pregnancy goals.
It may be appropriate to continue or ini-
tiate AID therapy in carefully selected
pregnant individuals with type 1 diabetes
in the setting of using assistive techni-
ques with expert guidance (107). Assess-
ments of potential candidates for AID
wear in pregnancy should include rele-
vant parameters such as glycemic levels,
presence or absence of severe hypogly-
cemic or hyperglycemic events, ability or
comfort in engaging with diabetes tech-
nology, psychosocial determinants, cost,
individual preference, and other factors as
relevant. In addition, individuals who use
AID systems that do not have pregnancy-
speciﬁc glucose targets often beneﬁt from
assistive techniques for pump manage-
ment as determined by expert guidance
from
an
experienced
interprofessional
team (107). Partial closed-loop therapy,
such as predictive low-glucose suspend
(PLGS) technology, has been shown in non-
pregnant people to be better than sensor-
augmented insulin pumps (SAP) for reduc-
ing low glucose values (108). It may be
suited for pregnancy because the predic-
tive low-glucose threshold for suspending
insulin is in the range of premeal and over-
night glucose value targets in pregnancy
and may allow for more aggressive prandial
dosing. See SENSOR-AUGMENTED PUMPS and AUTO-
MATED INSULIN DELIVERY SYSTEMS in Section 7,
“Diabetes Technology,” for more informa-
tion on these systems.
Type 1 Diabetes
Pregnant individuals with type 1 diabetes
have an increased risk of hypoglycemia in
the ﬁrst trimester and, like all pregnant
people, have altered counter-regulatory
response in pregnancy that may decrease
hypoglycemia awareness. Education for
people with diabetes and family mem-
bers about the prevention, recognition,
and treatment of hypoglycemia is impor-
tant before, during, and after pregnancy
to help prevent and manage hypoglyce-
mia risk. Insulin resistance drops rapidly
with the delivery of the placenta.
Pregnancy is a ketogenic state, and
people with type 1 diabetes, and to a
lesser extent those with type 2 diabe-
tes, are at risk for diabetic ketoacidosis
(DKA) at lower blood glucose levels
than in the nonpregnant state. Pregnant
people with type 1 diabetes should be
advised to obtain ketone test strips and
receive education on DKA prevention
and detection. DKA carries a high risk of
stillbirth. Those in DKA who are unable
to eat often require 10% dextrose with
an insulin drip to adequately meet the
higher carbohydrate demands of the
placenta and fetus in the third trimester
in order to resolve their ketosis.
Retinopathy is a special concern in
pregnancy. The necessary rapid imple-
mentation of euglycemia in the setting of
retinopathy is associated with worsening
of retinopathy (109). Meta-analyses have
also demonstrated a high risk of new-
onset retinopathy and progression of ex-
isting retinopathy in pregnant individuals
with type 1 or type 2 diabetes (110,111).
Type 2 Diabetes
Type 2 diabetes is often associated with
obesity. Recommended weight gain dur-
ing pregnancy for people with overweight
is 15–25 lb (6.8–11.3 kg) and for those
with obesity is 10–20 lb (4.5–9.1 kg)
(67). There are no adequate data on op-
timal weight gain versus weight mainte-
nance in pregnant people with BMI
>35 kg/m2; however, losing weight is
not recommended because of the in-
creased risk of small-for-gestational age
infants (21).
Optimal glycemic goals are often easier
to achieve during pregnancy with type 2
diabetes than with type 1 diabetes but
can require much higher doses of insulin,
sometimes
necessitating
concentrated
insulin formulations. Insulin is the pre-
ferred treatment for type 2 diabetes in
pregnancy. An RCTof metformin added to
insulin for the treatment of type 2 diabe-
tes found less maternal weight gain and
fewer cesarean births. There were fewer
macrosomic neonates, but there was
a
doubling
of
small-for-gestational-age
S288
Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

neonates (112). As in type 1 diabetes, insu-
lin requirements drop dramatically after
delivery.
The risk for associated hypertension
and other comorbidities may be as high
or higher with type 2 diabetes com-
pared with type 1 diabetes, even if dia-
betes is better managed and of shorter
apparent duration, with pregnancy loss
appearing to be more prevalent in the
third trimester in those with type 2 dia-
betes, compared with the ﬁrst trimester
in those with type 1 diabetes (113,114).
PREECLAMPSIA AND ASPIRIN
Recommendation
15.20 Pregnant individuals with type 1
or type 2 diabetes should be pre-
scribed low-dose aspirin 100–150 mg/
day starting at 12 to 16 weeks of ges-
tation to lower the risk of preeclamp-
sia. E A dosage of 162 mg/day may
be acceptable; E currently, in the
U.S., low-dose aspirin is available in
81-mg tablets.
Diabetes in pregnancy is associated with
an increased risk of preeclampsia (115).
The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
recommends using low-dose aspirin (81
mg/day) as a preventive medication at
12 weeks of gestation in individuals at
high risk for preeclampsia, such as those
with type 1 or type 2 diabetes (116).
However, a meta-analysis and an addi-
tional trial demonstrate that low-dose
aspirin <100 mg is not effective in re-
ducing preeclampsia. Low-dose aspirin
>100 mg is required (117–119). A cost-
beneﬁt analysis has concluded that
this approach would reduce morbidity,
save lives, and lower health care costs
(120). There are insufﬁcient data about
whether the use of aspirin speciﬁcally
in pregnant people with preexisting dia-
betes ultimately reduces the incidence
of preeclampsia (121,122), although a
meta-analysis showed that preeclampsia
reductions occurred with aspirin adminis-
tration in high-risk groups overall (115).
Individuals with GDM may be candidates
for aspirin therapy for preeclampsia pre-
vention if they have a single high risk fac-
tor, such as chronic hypertension or an
autoimmune disease, or multiple moder-
ate risk factors, such as being nulliparous,
having obesity, being age $35 years, or
other factors per the U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force (116). More studies
are needed to assess the long-term ef-
fects of prenatal aspirin exposure on off-
spring (121).
PREGNANCY AND DRUG
CONSIDERATIONS
Recommendations
15.21 In pregnant individuals with dia-
betes and chronic hypertension, a
blood pressure threshold of 140/90
mmHg for initiation or titration of ther-
apy is associated with better preg-
nancy
outcomes
than
reserving
treatment for severe hypertension,
with no increase in risk of small-for-
gestational-age birth weight. A There
are limited data on the optimal lower
limit,buttherapyshouldbedeintensiﬁed
for blood pressure <90/60 mmHg. E A
blood pressure target of 110–135/
85 mmHg is suggested in the interest
of reducing the risk for accelerated ma-
ternal hypertension. A
15.22 Potentially harmful medica-
tions in pregnancy (i.e., ACE inhibi-
tors, angiotensin receptor blockers,
statins) should be stopped prior to
conception and avoided in sexually
active
individuals
of childbearing
potential who are not using reliable
contraception. B
In normal pregnancy, blood pressure is
lower than in the nonpregnant state.
The Chronic Hypertension and Preg-
nancy (CHAP) Trial Consortium’s RCT on
treatment for mild chronic hypertension
during pregnancy demonstrated that
a blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg, as
the threshold for initiation or titration
of treatment, reduces the incidence of
adverse pregnancy outcomes without
compromising fetal growth (123). The
CHAP Consortium’s study mitigates con-
cerns about small-for-gestational-age birth
weight. Attained mean ± SD blood pres-
sure measurements in the treated versus
untreated groups were systolic 129.5 ±
10.0 vs. 132.6 ± 10.1 mmHg (between-
group difference 3.11 [95% CI 3.95 to
2.28]) and diastolic 79.1 ± 7.4 vs. 81.5 ±
8.0 mmHg (2.33 [95% CI 2.97 to
0.04]) (123). Individuals with diabetes had
an even better composite outcome score
than those without diabetes (123).
As a result of the CHAP study, ACOG
issued a Practice Advisory recommend-
ing a blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg
as the threshold for initiation or titra-
tion of medical therapy for chronic hy-
pertension in pregnancy (124) rather
than
their
previously
recommended
threshold of 160/110 mmHg (125).
The CHAP study provides additional
guidance for the management of hyper-
tension in pregnancy. Data from the pre-
viously published Control of Hypertension
in Pregnancy Study (CHIPS) supports a
target blood pressure goal of 110–135/85
mmHg to reduce the risk of uncontrolled
maternal hypertension and minimize im-
paired fetal growth (125–127). The 2015
study (126) excluded pregnancies compli-
cated by preexisting diabetes, and only
6% of participants had GDM at enroll-
ment. There was no difference in preg-
nancy loss, neonatal care, or other
neonatal outcomes between the groups
with tighter versus less tight control of
hypertension (126).
During pregnancy, treatment with ACE
inhibitors and angiotensin receptor block-
ers is contraindicated because they may
cause fetal renal dysplasia, oligohydram-
nios, pulmonary hypoplasia, and intra-
uterine growth restriction (23).
A large study found that after adjust-
ing for confounders, ﬁrst trimester ACE
inhibitor exposure does not appear to be
associated with congenital malforma-
tions (128). However, ACE inhibitors and
angiotensin receptor blockers should be
stopped as soon as possible in the ﬁrst
trimester to avoid second and third tri-
mester fetopathy (128). Antihypertensive
drugs known to be effective and safe in
pregnancy include methyldopa, nifedi-
pine, labetalol, diltiazem, clonidine, and
prazosin. Atenolol is not recommended,
but other b-blockers may be used, if
necessary. Chronic diuretic use during
pregnancy is not recommended as it has
been associated with restricted maternal
plasma volume, which may reduce ute-
roplacental perfusion (129). On the basis
of available evidence, statins should also
be avoided in pregnancy (130).
See pregnancy and antihypertensive
medications in Section 10, “Cardiovascular
Disease and Risk Management,” for more
information on managing blood pressure
in pregnancy.
POSTPARTUM CARE
Recommendations
15.23 Insulin resistance decreases
dramatically immediately postpartum,
diabetesjournals.org/care
Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy
S289
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

and insulin requirements need to be
evaluated and adjusted as they are
often roughly half the prepregnancy
requirements for the initial few days
postpartum. C
15.24 A contraceptive plan should
be discussed and implemented with
all people with diabetes of childbear-
ing potential. A
15.25 Screen individuals with a recent
history of GDM at 4–12 weeks post-
partum, using the 75-g oral glucose
tolerance test and clinically appropri-
ate nonpregnancy diagnostic criteria. B
15.26 Individuals with overweight/
obesity and a history of GDM found
to have prediabetes should receive
intensive lifestyle interventions and/or
metformin to prevent diabetes. A
15.27 Breastfeeding efforts are rec-
ommended for all individuals with
diabetes. A Breastfeeding is recom-
mended for individuals with a his-
tory of GDM for multiple beneﬁts, A
including a reduced risk for type 2
diabetes later in life. B
15.28 Individuals with a history of
GDM should have lifelong screening
for the development of type 2 diabe-
tes or prediabetes every 1–3 years. B
15.29 Individuals with a history of
GDM
should
seek
preconception
screening for diabetes and precon-
ception care to identify and treat hy-
perglycemia and prevent congenital
malformations. E
15.30 Postpartum care should include
psychosocial assessment and support
for self-care. E
Gestational Diabetes Mellitus
Postpartum Care
Because GDM often represents previ-
ously undiagnosed prediabetes, type 2
diabetes, maturity-onset diabetes of the
young, or even developing type 1 diabe-
tes, individuals with GDM should be
tested for persistent diabetes or predia-
betes at 4–12 weeks postpartum with a
fasting 75-g OGTT using nonpregnancy
criteria as outlined in Section 2, “Diagnosis
and Classiﬁcation of Diabetes,” speciﬁcally
Tables 2.1 and 2.2. The OGTT is recom-
mended over A1C at 4–12 weeks postpar-
tum because A1C may be persistently
impacted (lowered) by the increased red
blood cell turnover related to preg-
nancy, by blood loss at delivery, or by
the preceding 3-month glucose proﬁle.
The OGTT is more sensitive at detecting
glucose intolerance, including both predia-
betes and diabetes. In the absence of un-
equivocal hyperglycemia, a positive screen
for diabetes requires two abnormal val-
ues. If both the fasting plasma glucose
($126 mg/dL [$7.0 mmol/L]) and 2-h
plasma glucose ($200 mg/dL [$11.1
mmol/L]) are abnormal in a single screen-
ing test, then the diagnosis of diabetes is
made. If only one abnormal value in the
OGTT meets diabetes criteria, the test
should be repeated to conﬁrm that the
abnormality persists. OGTT testing imme-
diately postpartum, while still hospitalized,
has demonstrated improved engagement
in testing but also variably reduced sensi-
tivity to the diagnosis of impaired fasting
glucose, impaired glucose tolerance, and
type 2 diabetes (131,132).
Individuals with a history of GDM should
have ongoing screening for prediabetes or
type 2 diabetes every 1–3 years, even if
the results of the initial 4–12 week post-
partum 75-g OGTT are normal. Ongoing
evaluation may be performed with any rec-
ommended glycemic test (e.g., annual A1C,
annual fasting plasma glucose, or triennial
75-g OGTT using thresholds for nonpreg-
nant individuals).
Individuals with a history of GDM
have an increased lifetime maternal
risk for diabetes estimated at 50–60%
(133,134), and those with GDM have
a 10-fold increased risk of developing
type 2 diabetes compared with those
without GDM (133). Absolute risk of
developing type 2 diabetes after GDM
increases linearly through a person’s
lifetime, being approximately 20% at
10 years, 30% at 20 years, 40% at 30 years,
50% at 40 years, and 60% at 50 years
(134). In the prospective Nurses’ Health
Study II (NHS II), subsequent diabetes
risk after a history of GDM was signiﬁ-
cantly lower in those who followed
healthy eating patterns (135). Adjusting
for BMI attenuated this association mod-
erately, but not completely. Interpreg-
nancy weight gain is associated with
increased risk of adverse pregnancy out-
comes (136) and higher risk of GDM,
while in people with BMI >25 kg/m2,
weight loss is associated with lower risk
of developing GDM in the subsequent
pregnancy (137). Development of type 2
diabetes is 18% higher per unit of BMI
increase
from
prepregnancy
BMI
at
follow-up, highlighting the importance of
effective weight management after GDM
(138). In addition, postdelivery lifestyle in-
terventions are effective in reducing risk of
type 2 diabetes (139).
Both metformin and intensive life-
style intervention prevent or delay pro-
gression to diabetes in individuals with
prediabetes and a history of GDM. Only
ﬁve to six individuals with prediabetes
and a history of GDM need to be treated
with either intervention to prevent one
case of diabetes over 3 years (140). In
these individuals, lifestyle intervention
and metformin reduced progression to di-
abetes by 35% and 40%, respectively,
over 10 years compared with placebo
(141). If the pregnancy has motivated the
adoption of healthy nutrition, building on
these gains to support weight loss is rec-
ommended in the postpartum period.
(See Section 3, “Prevention or Delay of
Diabetes and Associated Comorbidities.”)
Individuals with prediabetes or a his-
tory of GDM will need preconception
evaluation for as long as they have child-
bearing potential.
Preexisting Type 1 and Type 2
Diabetes Postpartum Care
Insulin sensitivity increases dramatically
with the delivery of the placenta. In one
study, insulin requirements in the imme-
diate postpartum period are roughly
34% lower than prepregnancy insulin re-
quirements (142). Insulin sensitivity then
returns to prepregnancy levels over the
following 1–2 weeks. For individuals tak-
ing insulin, particular attention should
be directed to hypoglycemia prevention
in the setting of breastfeeding and er-
ratic sleep and eating schedules (143).
Lactation
Considering the immediate nutritional and
immunological beneﬁts of breastfeeding
for the baby, all mothers, including those
with diabetes, should be supported in at-
tempts to breastfeed. An analysis of 28
systematic reviews and meta-analyses of
associations between breastfeeding and
outcomes in children found that breast-
feeding was associated with numerous
health beneﬁts for children such as re-
duced infant mortality due to infectious
diseases at <6 months of age (odds ratio
[OR] 0.22–0.59 across studies), reduced
respiratory infections in children aged
<2 years, and reduced asthma or wheez-
ing in children aged 5–18 years (OR 0.91,
0.85–0.98) (144). The same analysis found
S290
Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

that breastfeeding was associated with
improved maternal health outcomes in-
cluding reduced risks of breast cancer
(OR 0.81 [95% CI 0.77–0.86]), ovarian
cancer (OR 0.70 [95% CI 0.64–0.75]), and
type 2 diabetes (OR 0.68 [95% CI 0.57–
0.82]). Breastfeeding may also confer
longer-term metabolic beneﬁts to both
mother (145) and offspring (146). Breast-
feeding reduces the risk of developing
type 2 diabetes in mothers with previous
GDM (145). It may improve the metabolic
risk factors of offspring, but more studies
are needed (147). However, lactation can
increase the risk of overnight hypoglyce-
mia, and insulin dosing may need to be
adjusted.
Contraception
A major barrier to effective preconcep-
tion care is the fact that the majority
of pregnancies are unplanned. Planning
pregnancy is critical in individuals with
preexisting diabetes to achieve the opti-
mal glycemic goals necessary to prevent
congenital malformations and reduce
the risk of other complications. There-
fore, all individuals with diabetes of
childbearing potential should have fam-
ily planning options reviewed at regular
intervals to make sure that effective
contraception is implemented and main-
tained. This applies to individuals in the
immediate postpartum period. Individu-
als with diabetes have the same contra-
ception options and recommendations as
those without diabetes. Long-acting, re-
versible contraception may be ideal for
individuals with diabetes and childbear-
ing potential. The risk of an unplanned
pregnancy outweighs the risk of any cur-
rently available contraception option.
References
1. Dabelea D, Hanson RL, Lindsay RS, et al.
Intrauterine exposure to diabetes conveys risks
for type 2 diabetes and obesity: a study of
discordant sibships. Diabetes 2000;49:2208–2211
2. Holmes VA, Young IS, Patterson CC, et al.;
Diabetes and Pre-eclampsia Intervention Trial Study
Group. Optimal glycemic control, pre-eclampsia,
and gestational hypertension in women with type 1
diabetes in the diabetes and pre-eclampsia inter-
vention trial. Diabetes Care 2011;34:1683–1688
3. Guerin A, Nisenbaum R, Ray JG. Use of
maternal GHb concentration to estimate the risk
of congenital anomalies in the offspring of women
with prepregnancy diabetes. Diabetes Care 2007;
30:1920–1925
4. Jensen DM, Korsholm L, Ovesen P, et al. Peri-
conceptional A1C and risk of serious adverse
pregnancy outcome in 933 women with type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2009;32:1046–1048
5. Suhonen L, Hiilesmaa V, Teramo K. Glycaemic
control during early pregnancy and fetal mal-
formations in women with type I diabetes mellitus.
Diabetologia 2000;43:79–82
6. Nielsen GL, Møller M, Sørensen HT. HbA1c in
early diabetic pregnancy and pregnancy out-
comes: a Danish population-based cohort study
of 573 pregnancies in women with type 1 diabetes.
Diabetes Care 2006;29:2612–2616
7. Ludvigsson JF, Neovius M, S€oderling J, et al.
Maternal glycemic control in type 1 diabetes and
the risk for preterm birth: a population-based
cohort study. Ann Intern Med 2019;170:691–701
8. Wahabi HA, Alzeidan RA, Bawazeer GA, Alansari
LA, Esmaeil SA. Preconception care for diabetic
women for improving maternal and fetal out-
comes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2010;10:63
9. Charron-Prochownik D, Sereika SM, Becker D,
et al. Long-term effects of the booster-enhanced
READY-Girls preconception counseling program
on intentions and behaviors for family planning
in teens with diabetes. Diabetes Care 2013;36:
3870–3874
10. ACOG Committee Opinion No. 762: Pre-
pregnancy counseling. Obstet Gynecol 2019;133:
e78–e89
11. Peterson C, Grosse SD, Li R, et al. Preven-
table health and cost burden of adverse birth
outcomes associated with pregestational dia-
betes in the United States. Am J Obstet Gynecol
2015;212:74.e1–74.e9
12. Britton LE, Hussey JM, Berry DC, Crandell JL,
Brooks JL, Bryant AG. Contraceptive Use among
women with prediabetes and diabetes in a US
national sample. J Midwifery Womens Health
2019;64:36–45
13. Morris JR, Tepper NK. Description and com-
parison of postpartum use of effective contra-
ception among women with and without diabetes.
Contraception 2019;100:474–479
14. Goldstuck ND, Steyn PS. The intrauterine
device in women with diabetes mellitus type I
and II: a systematic review. ISRN Obstet Gynecol
2013;2013:814062
15. Wu JP, Moniz MH, Ursu AN. Long-acting re-
versible contraception-highly efﬁcacious, safe,
and underutilized. JAMA 2018;320:397–398
16. American College of Obstetricians and Gyne-
cologists’ Committee on Practice Bulletins—
Obstetrics. ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 201:
Pregestational Diabetes Mellitus. Obstet Gynecol
2018;132:e228–e248
17. AmericanDiabetes Association. Diabetes and
Reproductive Health for Girls. 2016. Accessed 25
September 2023. Available from https://diabetes.
org/sites/default/ﬁles/2021-06/16_ready_girls
_book_proof_4.15.16%5B1%5D.pdf
18. Wahabi HA, Fayed A, Esmaeil S, et al.
Systematic review and meta-analysis of the effe-
ctiveness of pre-pregnancy care for women with
diabetes for improving maternal and perinatal
outcomes. PLoS One 2020;15:e0237571
19. Alexander EK, Pearce EN, Brent GA, et al.
2017 guidelines of the American Thyroid Asso-
ciation for the diagnosis and management of
thyroid disease during pregnancy and the post-
partum.Thyroid 2017;27:315–389
20. Ramos DE. Preconception health: changing
the paradigm on well-woman health. Obstet Gynecol
Clin North Am 2019;46:399–408
21. Obesity in pregnancy: ACOG Practice Bulletin,
Number 230. Obstet Gynecol 2021;137:e128–e144
22. Relph S, Patel T, Delaney L, Sobhy S, Thanga-
ratinam S. Adverse pregnancy outcomes in women
with diabetes-related microvascular disease and
risks of disease progression in pregnancy: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS Med
2021;18:e1003856
23. Bullo M, Tschumi S, Bucher BS, Bianchetti
MG, Simonetti GD. Pregnancy outcome following
exposure to angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors or angiotensin receptor antagonists:
a systematic review. Hypertension 2012;60:
444–450
24. Bateman BT, Hernandez-Diaz S, Fischer MA,
et al. Statins and congenital malformations:
cohort study. BMJ 2015;350:h1035
25. Taguchi N, Rubin ET, Hosokawa A, et al.
Prenatal exposure to HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors:
effects on fetal and neonatal outcomes. Reprod
Toxicol 2008;26:175–177
26. Widyaputri F, Rogers SL, Kandasamy R, Shub
A, Symons RCA, Lim LL. Global estimates of
diabetic retinopathy prevalence and progression
in pregnant women with preexisting diabetes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA
Ophthalmol 2022;140:486–494
27. Neoh SL, Grisoni JA, Feig DS; CONCEPTT
Collaborative Group. Dietary intakes of women
with type 1 diabetes before and during pregnancy:
a pre-speciﬁed secondary subgroup analysis among
CONCEPTT participants. Diabet Med 2020;37:
1841–1848
28. Marshall NE, Abrams B, Barbour LA, et al.
The importance of nutrition in pregnancy and
lactation: lifelong consequences. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2022;226:607–632
29. Garcıa-Patterson A, Gich I, Amini SB, Catalano
PM, de Leiva A, Corcoy R. Insulin requirements
throughout pregnancy in women with type 1
diabetes mellitus: three changes of direction.
Diabetologia 2010;53:446–451
30. Mathiesen JM, Secher AL, Ringholm L, et al.
Changes in basal rates and bolus calculator settings
in insulin pumps during pregnancy in women with
type 1 diabetes. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
2014;27:724–728
31. Best Practice Guide: using diabetes technology
in pregnancy. 2020. Accessed 11 August 2023.
Available from https://abcd.care/sites/abcd.care/
ﬁles/site_uploads/Resources/DTN/BP-Pregnancy-
DTN-V2.0.pdf
32. Padmanabhan S, Lee VW, Mclean M, et al.
The association of falling insulin requirements
with maternal biomarkers and placental dys-
function: a prospective study of women with
preexisting diabetes in pregnancy. Diabetes Care
2017;40:1323–1330
33. de Veciana M, Major CA, Morgan MA, et al.
Postprandial versus preprandial blood glucose
monitoring in women with gestational diabetes
mellitus requiring insulin therapy. N Engl J Med
1995;333:1237–1241
34. Jovanovic-Peterson L, Peterson CM, Reed
GF, et al. Maternal postprandial glucose levels
and infant birth weight: the Diabetes in Early
Pregnancy Study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;164:
103–111
35. ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 190: Gestational
Diabetes Mellitus. Obstet Gynecol 2018;131:
e49–e64
diabetesjournals.org/care
Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy
S291
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

36. Hernandez TL, Friedman JE, Van Pelt RE,
Barbour LA. Patterns of glycemia in normal
pregnancy: should the current therapeutic targets
be challenged? Diabetes Care 2011;34:1660–1668
37. Battelino T, Danne T, Bergenstal RM, et al.
Clinical targets for continuous glucose monitoring
data interpretation: recommendations from the
international consensus on time in range. Diabetes
Care 2019;42:1593–1603
38. Ho YR,Wang P, Lu MC,Tseng ST,Yang CP,Yan
YH. Associations of mid-pregnancy HbA1c with
gestational diabetes and risk of adverse preg-
nancy outcomes in high-risk Taiwanese women.
PLoS One 2017;12:e0177563
39. Metzger BE, Lowe LP, Dyer AR, et al.; HAPO
Study Cooperative Research Group. Hypergly-
cemia and adverse pregnancy outcomes. N Engl J
Med 2008;358:1991–2002
40. Maresh MJ, Holmes VA, Patterson CC, et al.;
Diabetes and Pre-eclampsia Intervention Trial
Study Group. Glycemic targets in the second and
third trimester of pregnancy for women with
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2015;38:34–42
41. Nielsen LR, Ekbom P, Damm P, et al. HbA1c
levels are signiﬁcantly lower in early and late
pregnancy. Diabetes Care 2004;27:1200–1201
42. Mosca A, Paleari R, Dalfra MG, et al. Re-
ference intervals for hemoglobin A1c in pregnant
women: data from an Italian multicenter study.
Clin Chem 2006;52:1138–1143
43. Hummel M, Marienfeld S, Huppmann M,
et al. Fetal growth is increased by maternal type 1
diabetes and HLA DR4-related gene interactions.
Diabetologia 2007;50:850–858
44. Cyganek K, Skupien J, Katra B, et al. Risk of
macrosomia remains glucose-dependent in a
cohort of women with pregestational type 1
diabetes and good glycemic control. Endocrine
2017;55:447–455
45. Abell SK, Boyle JA, de Courten B, et al.
Impact of type 2 diabetes, obesity and glycaemic
control on pregnancy outcomes. Aust N Z J Obstet
Gynaecol 2017;57:308–314
46. Temple RC, Aldridge V, Stanley K, Murphy
HR. Glycaemic control throughout pregnancy and
risk of pre-eclampsia in women with type I
diabetes. BJOG 2006;113:1329–1332
47. Combs CA, Gunderson E, Kitzmiller JL, Gavin
LA, Main EK. Relationship of fetal macrosomia to
maternal postprandial glucose control during
pregnancy. Diabetes Care 1992;15:1251–1257
48. Langer O, Levy J, Brustman L, Anyaegbunam
A, Merkatz R, Divon M. Glycemic control in
gestational diabetes mellitus–how tight is tight
enough: small for gestational age versus large
for gestational age? Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;
161:646–653
49. Feig DS, Donovan LE, Corcoy R, et al.;
CONCEPTT Collaborative Group. Continuous
glucose monitoring in pregnant women with
type 1 diabetes (CONCEPTT): a multicentre inter-
national randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2017;
390:2347–2359
50. Kristensen K, €Ogge LE, Sengpiel V, et al.
Continuous glucose monitoring in pregnant
women with type 1 diabetes: an observational
cohort study of 186 pregnancies. Diabetologia
2019;62:1143–1153
51. Law GR, Gilthorpe MS, Secher AL, et al.
Translating HbA1c measurements into estimated
average glucose values in pregnant women with
diabetes. Diabetologia 2017;60:618–624
52. Ahmed RJ, Gafni A, Hutton EK, et al.;
CONCEPTT
Collaborative
Group.
The
cost
implications of continuous glucose monitoring in
pregnant women with type 1 diabetes in 3
Canadian provinces: a posthoc cost analysis of the
CONCEPTT trial. CMAJ Open 2021;9:E627–E634
53. Garcıa-Moreno RM, Benıtez-Valderrama P,
Barquiel B, et al. Efﬁcacy of continuous glucose
monitoring on maternal and neonatal outcomes
in gestational diabetes mellitus: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical
trials. Diabet Med 2022;39:e14703
54. Wyckoff JA, Brown FM. Time in range in
pregnancy: is there a role? Diabetes Spectr 2021;
34:119–132
55. Nørgaard SK, Mathiesen ER, Nørgaard K,
Ringholm L. Comparison of glycemic metrics
measured simultaneously by intermittently
scanned continuous glucose monitoring and
real-time continuous glucose monitoring in
pregnant women with type 1 diabetes. Dia-
betes Technol Ther 2021;23:665–672
56. Scholtens DM, Kuang A, Lowe LP, et al.;
HAPO Follow-up Study Cooperative Research
Group; HAPO Follow-Up Study Cooperative
Research Group. Hyperglycemia and adverse
pregnancy outcome follow-up study (HAPO
FUS): maternal glycemia and childhood glucose
metabolism. Diabetes Care 2019;42:381–392
57. Lowe WL Jr, Scholtens DM, Kuang A, et al.;
HAPO Follow-up Study Cooperative Research
Group. Hyperglycemia and adverse pregnancy
outcome follow-up study (HAPO FUS): maternal
gestational diabetes mellitus and childhood
glucose metabolism. Diabetes Care 2019;42:
372–380
58. Koivusalo SB, R€on€o K, Klemetti MM, et al.
Gestational diabetes mellitus can be prevented
by lifestyle intervention: the ﬁnnish gestational
diabetes prevention study (RADIEL): a randomized
controlled trial. Diabetes Care 2016;39:24–30
59. Wang C, Wei Y, Zhang X, et al. A randomized
clinical trial of exercise during pregnancy to prevent
gestational diabetes mellitus and improve pre-
gnancy outcome in overweight and obese pregnant
women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2017;216:340–351
60. Grifﬁth RJ, Alsweiler J, Moore AE, et al.
Interventions to prevent women from developing
gestational diabetes mellitus: an overview of
Cochrane Reviews. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2020;6:CD012394
61. Doi SAR, Furuya-Kanamori L, Toft E, et al.
Metformin in pregnancy to avert gestational dia-
betes in women at high risk: Meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. Obes Rev 2020;
21:e12964
62. Xie W, Dai P, Qin Y, Wu M, Yang B, Yu X.
Effectiveness of telemedicine for pregnant women
with gestational diabetes mellitus: an updated
meta-analysis of 32 randomized controlled trials
with trial sequential analysis. BMC Pregnancy
Childbirth 2020;20:198
63. Metzger BE, Buchanan TA, Coustan DR, et al.
Summary and recommendations of the Fifth
International Workshop-Conference on Gesta-
tional Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes Care 2007;
30(Suppl. 2):S251–S260
64. Mayo K, Melamed N, Vandenberghe H,
Berger H. The impact of adoption of the
international association of diabetes in pre-
gnancy study group criteria for the screening and
diagnosis of gestational diabetes. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2015;212:224.e1–224.e9
65. Han S, Middleton P, Shepherd E,Van Ryswyk
E, Crowther CA. Different types of dietary advice
for women with gestational diabetes mellitus.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;2:CD009275
66. Viana LV, Gross JL, Azevedo MJ. Dietary
intervention in patients with gestational diabetes
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized clinical trials on maternal and newborn
outcomes. Diabetes Care 2014;37:3345–3355
67. Weight Gain During Pregnancy: Reexamining
the Guidelines. Rasmussen KM, Yaktine AL, Eds.
Washington DC, 2009. Accessed 25 September
2023.
Available
from
https://nap.national
academies.org/catalog/12584/weight-gain
-during-pregnancy-reexamining-the-guidelines
68. Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential
Guide to Nutrient Requirements. The National
Academies Press, 2006
69. Hernandez
TL,
Mande
A,
Barbour
LA.
Nutrition therapy within and beyond gestational
diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2018;145:39–50
70. Hernandez TL, Van Pelt RE, Anderson MA,
et al. A higher-complex carbohydrate diet in
gestational diabetes mellitus achieves glucose
targets and lowers postprandial lipids: a
randomized crossover study. Diabetes Care
2014;37:1254–1262
71. Laredo-Aguilera
JA,
Gallardo-Bravo
M,
Rabanales-Sotos JA, Cobo-Cuenca AI, Carmona-
Torres JM. Physical activity programs during
pregnancy are effective for the control of
gestational diabetes mellitus. Int J Environ Res
Public Health 2020;17:6151
72. Hartling L, Dryden DM, Guthrie A, Muise M,
Vandermeer B, Donovan L. Beneﬁts and harms of
treating gestational diabetes mellitus: a systematic
review and meta-analysis for the U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force and the National Institutes of
Health Ofﬁce of Medical Applications of Research.
Ann Intern Med 2013;159:123–129
73. Rowan JA, Hague WM, Gao W, Battin MR;
MiG Trial Investigators. Metformin versus insulin
for the treatment of gestational diabetes. N Engl
J Med 2008;358:2003–2015
74. Gui J, Liu Q, Feng L. Metformin vs insulin in
the management of gestational diabetes: a meta-
analysis. PLoS One 2013;8:e64585
75. Langer O, Conway DL, Berkus MD, Xenakis
EM, Gonzales O. A comparison of glyburide and
insulin in women with gestational diabetes
mellitus. N Engl J Med 2000;343:1134–1138
76. Hebert MF, Ma X, Naraharisetti SB, et al.;
Obstetric-Fetal
Pharmacology
Research
Unit
Network. Are we optimizing gestational diabetes
treatment with glyburide? The pharmacologic
basis for better clinical practice. Clin Pharmacol
Ther 2009;85:607–614
77. Malek
R,
Davis
SN.
Pharmacokinetics,
efﬁcacy and safety of glyburide for treatment of
gestational diabetes mellitus. Expert Opin Drug
Metab Toxicol 2016;12:691–699
78. Balsells M, Garcıa-Patterson A, Sola I, Roque
M, Gich I, Corcoy R. Glibenclamide, metformin,
and insulin for the treatment of gestational
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
BMJ 2015;350:h102
79. Tarry-Adkins
JL,
Aiken
CE,
Ozanne
SE.
Comparative impact of pharmacological treat-
ments for gestational diabetes on neonatal
anthropometry independent of maternal glycaemic
S292
Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

control: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
PLoS Med 2020;17:e1003126
80. Senat MV, Affres H, Letourneau A, et al.;
Groupe
de
Recherche
en
Obstetrique
et
Gynecologie (GROG). Effect of glyburide vs
subcutaneous insulin on perinatal complications
among women with gestational diabetes: a
randomized
clinical
trial.
JAMA
2018;319:
1773–1780
81. Silva JC, Pacheco C, Bizato J, de Souza BV,
Ribeiro TE, Bertini AM. Metformin compared
with glyburide for the management of gestational
diabetes. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2010;111:37–40
82. Nachum Z, Zafran N, Salim R, et al. Glyburide
versus metformin and their combination for the
treatment of gestational diabetes mellitus: a
randomized controlled study. Diabetes Care
2017;40:332–337
83. Jiang YF, Chen XY, Ding T, Wang XF, Zhu ZN,
Su SW. Comparative efﬁcacy and safety of OADs
in management of GDM: network meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2015;100:2071–2080
84. Vanky E, Zahlsen K, Spigset O, Carlsen SM.
Placental passage of metformin in women with
polycystic ovary syndrome. Fertil Steril 2005;83:
1575–1578
85. Charles B, Norris R, Xiao X, Hague W.
Population pharmacokinetics of metformin in
late pregnancy.Ther Drug Monit 2006;28:67–72
86. Rowan JA, Rush EC, Plank LD, et al. Met-
formin in gestational diabetes: the offspring
follow-up (MiG TOFU): body composition and
metabolic outcomes at 7-9 years of age. BMJ
Open Diabetes Res Care 2018;6:e000456
87. Hanem LGE, Stridsklev S, Julıusson PB, et al.
Metformin use in PCOS pregnancies increases
the risk of offspring overweight at 4 years of age:
follow-up of two RCTs. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2018;103:1612–1621
88. Tarry-Adkins JL, Aiken CE, Ozanne SE.
Neonatal, infant, and childhood growth following
metformin versus insulin treatment for gestational
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
PLoS Med 2019;16:e1002848
89. Hanem LGE, Salvesen Ø, Juliusson PB, et al.
Intrauterine metformin exposure and offspring
cardiometabolic risk factors (PedMet study): a 5-
10 year follow-up of the PregMet randomised
controlled trial. Lancet Child Adolesc Health
2019;3:166–174
90. Feig DS, Sanchez JJ, Murphy KE, et al.; MiTy
Kids Collaborative Group. Outcomes in children
of women with type 2 diabetes exposed to
metformin versus placebo during pregnancy
(MiTy Kids): a 24-month follow-up of the MiTy
randomised controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol 2023;11:191–202
91. Vanky E, Stridsklev S, Heimstad R, et al.
Metformin versus placebo from ﬁrst trimester to
delivery in polycystic ovary syndrome: a randomized,
controlled multicenter study. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2010;95:E448–E455
92. Legro RS, Barnhart HX, Schlaff WD, et al.;
Cooperative Multicenter Reproductive Medicine
Network. Clomiphene, metformin, or both for
infertility in the polycystic ovary syndrome. N
Engl J Med 2007;356:551–566
93. Palomba S, Orio F Jr, Falbo A, et al. Pros-
pective parallel randomized, double-blind, double-
dummy controlled
clinical
trial
comparing
clomiphene citrate and metformin as the ﬁrst-
line treatment for ovulation induction in nono-
bese anovulatory women with polycystic ovary
syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2005;90:
4068–4074
94. Palomba S, Orio F Jr, Nardo LG, et al.
Metformin administration versus laparoscopic
ovarian diathermy in clomiphene citrate-resistant
women with polycystic ovary syndrome: a
prospective parallel randomized double-blind
placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2004;89:4801–4809
95. Barbour LA, Feig DS. Metformin for gestational
diabetes mellitus: progeny, perspective, and a
personalized approach. Diabetes Care 2019;42:
396–399
96. Barbour LA, Scifres C, Valent AM, et al. A
cautionary
response
to
SMFM
statement:
pharmacological treatment of gestational diabetes.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2018;219:367.e1–367.e7
97. Farrar D, Tuffnell DJ, West J, West HM.
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion versus
multiple daily injections of insulin for pregnant
women with diabetes. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2016;2016:CD005542
98. Mathiesen ER, Hod M, Ivanisevic M, et al.;
Detemir in Pregnancy Study Group. Maternal
efﬁcacy and safety outcomes in a randomized,
controlled trial comparing insulin detemir with
NPH insulin in 310 pregnant women with type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2012;35:2012–2017
99. Hod M, Mathiesen ER, Jovanovic L, et al. A
randomized trial comparing perinatal outcomes
using insulin detemir or neutral protamine
Hagedorn in type 1 diabetes. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 2014;27:7–13
100. Hod M, Damm P, Kaaja R, et al.; Insulin
Aspart
Pregnancy
Study
Group.
Fetal
and
perinatal outcomes in type 1 diabetes pregnancy:
a randomized study comparing insulin aspart
with human insulin in 322 subjects. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2008;198:186.e1–186.e7
101. Persson B, Swahn ML, Hjertberg R, et al.
Insulin lispro therapy in pregnancies complicated
by type 1 diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Res Clin
Pract 2002;58:115–121
102. Fishel Bartal M, Ward C, Blackwell SC, et al.
Detemir vs neutral protamine Hagedorn insulin
for diabetes mellitus in pregnancy: a comparative
effectiveness, randomized controlled trial. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 2021;225:87.e81–87.e10
103. Mathiesen ER, Alibegovic AC, Corcoy R,
et al.; EXPECT study group. Insulin degludec
versus insulin detemir, both in combination with
insulin aspart, in the treatment of pregnant
women with type 1 diabetes (EXPECT): an open-
label, multinational, randomised, controlled, non-
inferiority trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2023;
11:86–95
104. Pollex E, Moretti ME, Koren G, Feig DS.
Safety of insulin glargine use in pregnancy: a
systematic
review
and
meta-analysis.
Ann
Pharmacother 2011;45:9–16
105. Carta Q, Meriggi E, Trossarelli GF, et al.
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion versus
intensive conventional insulin therapy in type I
and type II diabetic pregnancy. Diabete Metab
1986;12:121–129
106. Kernaghan D, Farrell T, Hammond P, Owen
P. Fetal growth in women managed with insulin
pump therapy compared to conventional insulin.
Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2008;137:
47–49
107. Szmuilowicz ED, Levy CJ, Buschur EO,
Polsky S. Expert guidance on off-label use of
hybrid closed-loop therapy in pregnancies compli-
cated by diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2023;
25:363–373
108. Forlenza GP, Li Z, Buckingham BA, et al.
Predictive low-glucose suspend reduces hypo-
glycemia in adults, adolescents, and children with
type 1 diabetes in an at-home randomized cross-
over study: results of the PROLOG trial. Diabetes
Care 2018;41:2155–2161
109. Chew EY, Mills JL, Metzger BE, et al.;
National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development Diabetes in Early Pregnancy Study.
Metabolic control and progression of retino-
pathy: the Diabetes in Early Pregnancy Study.
Diabetes Care 1995;18:631–637
110. Sarvepalli SM, Bailey BA, D’Alessio D, et al.
Risk factors for the development or progression
of diabetic retinopathy in pregnancy: meta-
analysis and systematic review. Clin Exp Ophthalmol
2023;51:195–204
111. Widyaputri F, Rogers S, Lim L. Global
estimates of diabetic retinopathy prevalence
and progression in pregnant individuals with
preexisting diabetes: a meta-analysis. JAMA
Ophthalmol 2022;140:1137–1138
112. Feig DS, Donovan LE, Zinman B, et al.; MiTy
Collaborative Group. Metformin in women with
type 2 diabetes in pregnancy (MiTy): a multicentre,
international, randomised, placebo-controlled trial.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2020;8:834–844
113. Clausen
TD,
Mathiesen
E,
Ekbom
P,
Hellmuth E, Mandrup-Poulsen T, Damm P. Poor
pregnancy outcome in women with type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2005;28:323–328
114. Cundy T, Gamble G, Neale L, et al. Differing
causes of pregnancy loss in type 1 and type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2007;30:2603–2607
115. Duckitt K, Harrington D. Risk factors for
pre-eclampsia at antenatal booking: systematic
review of controlled studies. BMJ 2005;330:565
116. Henderson JT, Vesco KK, Senger CA, et al.
Aspirin Use to Prevent Preeclampsia and Related
Morbidity and Mortality (Evidence Synthesis, no.
205). Rockville, MD, Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality. Accessed 17 October 2023.
Available
from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
books/NBK574449/
117. Roberge S, Bujold E, Nicolaides KH. Aspirin
for the prevention of preterm and term pre-
eclampsia: systematic review and metaanalysis.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2018;218:287–293.e1
118. Rolnik DL, Wright D, Poon LC, et al. Aspirin
versus placebo in pregnancies at high risk for
preterm preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 2017;377:
613–622
119. Hoffman MK, Goudar SS, Kodkany BS,
et al.; ASPIRIN Study Group. Low-dose aspirin for
the prevention of preterm delivery in nulliparous
women with a singleton pregnancy (ASPIRIN): a
randomised,
double-blind,
placebo-controlled
trial. Lancet 2020;395:285–293
120. Werner EF, Hauspurg AK, Rouse DJ. A cost-
beneﬁt analysis of low-dose aspirin prophylaxis
for the prevention of preeclampsia in the United
States. Obstet Gynecol 2015;126:1242–1250
121. Zen M, Haider R, Simmons D, et al. Aspirin
for the prevention of pre-eclampsia in women
with pre-existing diabetes: systematic review.
Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 2022;62:12–21
diabetesjournals.org/care
Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy
S293
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

122. Voutetakis A, Pervanidou P, Kanaka-
Gantenbein C. Aspirin for the prevention of
preeclampsia and potential consequences for
fetal brain development. JAMA Pediatr 2019;173:
619–620
123. Tita AT, Szychowski JM, Boggess K, et al.;
Chronic Hypertension and Pregnancy (CHAP) Trial
Consortium. Treatment for mild chronic hyper-
tension during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 2022;
386:1781–1792
124. American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists. Clinical guidance for the inte-
gration of the ﬁndings of the Chronic Hyper-
tension and Pregnancy (CHAP) study. 2022.
Accessed 25 September 2023. Available from
https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/
practice-advisory/articles/2022/04/clinical-
guidance-for-the-integration-of-the-ﬁndings-
of-the-chronic-hypertension-and-pregnancy-
chap-study
125. American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists’ Committee on Practice Bulletins—
Obstetrics. ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 203:
Chronic Hypertension in Pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 2019;133:e26–e50
126. Magee LA, von Dadelszen P, Rey E, et al.
Less-tight versus tight control of hypertension in
pregnancy. N Engl J Med 2015;372:407–417
127. Brown MA, Magee LA, Kenny LC, et al.;
International Society for the Study of Hyper-
tension
in
Pregnancy
(ISSHP).
Hypertensive
disorders
of
pregnancy:
ISSHP
classiﬁcation,
diagnosis, and management recommendations for
international practice. Hypertension 2018;72:24–43
128. Bateman BT, Patorno E, Desai RJ, et al.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and
the risk of congenital malformations. Obstet
Gynecol 2017;129:174–184
129. Sibai BM. Treatment of hypertension in
pregnant women. N Engl J Med 1996;335:257–265
130. Kazmin A, Garcia-Bournissen F, Koren G.
Risks of statin use during pregnancy: a systematic
review. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 2007;29:906–908
131. Waters TP, Kim SY, Werner E, et al. Should
women with gestational diabetes be screened at
delivery hospitalization for type 2 diabetes? Am J
Obstet Gynecol 2020;222:73.e1–73.e11
132. Werner EF, Has P, Rouse D; Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM). Two-day post-
partum compared with 4- to 12-week postpartum
glucose tolerance testing for women with gestational
diabetes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2020;223:
439.e1–439.e7
133. Vounzoulaki E, Khunti K, Abner SC, Tan BK,
Davies MJ, Gillies CL. Progression to type 2
diabetes in women with a known history of
gestational diabetes: systematic review and
meta-analysis. BMJ 2020;369:m1361
134. Li Z, Cheng Y, Wang D, et al. Incidence rate
of type 2 diabetes mellitus after gestational
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of 170,139 women. J Diabetes Res 2020;
2020:3076463
135. Tobias DK, Hu FB, Chavarro J, Rosner B,
Mozaffarian
D,
Zhang
C.
Healthful
dietary
patterns and type 2 diabetes mellitus risk among
women with a history of gestational diabetes
mellitus. Arch Intern Med 2012;172:1566–1572
136. Villamor E, Cnattingius S. Interpregnancy
weight change and risk of adverse pregnancy
outcomes: a population-based study. Lancet 2006;
368:1164–1170
137. Martınez-Hortelano JA, Cavero-Redondo I,
Alvarez-Bueno C, Dıez-Fernandez A, Hernandez-
Luengo M, Martınez-Vizcaıno V. Interpregnancy
weight change and gestational diabetes mellitus:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obesity
(Silver Spring) 2021;29:454–464
138. Dennison RA, Chen ES, Green ME, et al.The
absolute and relative risk of type 2 diabetes after
gestational diabetes: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of 129 studies. Diabetes Res Clin
Pract 2021;171:108625
139. Li N, Yang Y, Cui D, et al. Effects of lifestyle
intervention on long-term risk of diabetes in
women
with
prior
gestational
diabetes:
a
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Obes Rev 2021;22:e13122
140. Ratner RE, Christophi CA, Metzger BE,
et al.; Diabetes Prevention Program Research
Group. Prevention of diabetes in women with
a history of gestational diabetes: effects of
metformin and lifestyle interventions. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2008;93:4774–4779
141. Aroda VR, Christophi CA, Edelstein SL,
et al.; Diabetes Prevention Program Research
Group. The effect of lifestyle intervention and
metformin on preventing or delaying diabetes
among women with and without gestational
diabetes: the Diabetes Prevention Program out-
comes study 10-year follow-up. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2015;100:1646–1653
142. Achong
N,
Duncan EL,
McIntyre HD,
Callaway L. Peripartum management of glycemia
in women with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care
2014;37:364–371
143. Riviello
C,
Mello
G,
Jovanovic
LG.
Breastfeeding and the basal insulin requirement
in type 1 diabetic women. Endocr Pract 2009;
15:187–193
144. Victora CG, Bahl R, Barros AJ, et al.; Lancet
Breastfeeding Series Group. Breastfeeding in the
21st century: epidemiology, mechanisms, and
lifelong effect. Lancet 2016;387:475–490
145. Stuebe AM, Rich-Edwards JW, Willett WC,
Manson JE, Michels KB. Duration of lactation and
incidence of type 2 diabetes. JAMA 2005;294:
2601–2610
146. Pereira PF, Alfenas RdeC, Araujo RM. Does
breastfeeding inﬂuence the risk of developing
diabetes mellitus in children? A review of current
evidence. J Pediatr (Rio J) 2014;90:7–15
147. Pathirana MM, Ali A, Lassi ZS, Arstall MA,
Roberts CT, Andraweera PH. Protective inﬂuence
of breastfeeding on cardiovascular risk factors
in women with previous gestational diabetes
mellitus and their children: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. J Hum Lact 2022;38:501–512
S294
Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

16. Diabetes Care in the Hospital:
Standards of Care in Diabetes—
2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S295–S306 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S016
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes
the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the
components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to
evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee, an
interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of
Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of
ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system
for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Prac-
tice Committee members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Read-
ers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at
professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
Among hospitalized individuals, hyperglycemia, hypoglycemia, and glucose variability
are associated with adverse outcomes, including increased morbidity and mortality
(1). Identiﬁcation and careful management of people with diabetes and dysglycemia
during hospitalization has direct and immediate beneﬁts. Diabetes management in
the inpatient setting is facilitated by identiﬁcation and treatment of hyperglycemia
prior to elective procedures, a dedicated inpatient diabetes management service ap-
plying validated standards of care, and a proactive transition plan for outpatient dia-
betes care with timely prearranged follow-up appointments. These steps can
improve outcomes, shorten hospital stays, and reduce the need for readmission and
emergency department visits. For older hospitalized individuals or for people with di-
abetes in long-term care facilities, please see Section 13, “Older Adults.”
HOSPITAL CARE DELIVERY STANDARDS
Recommendations
16.1 Perform an A1C test on all people with diabetes or hyperglycemia (random
blood glucose >140 mg/dL [>7.8 mmol/L]) admitted to the hospital if no A1C test
result is available from the prior 3 months. B
16.2 Institutions should implement protocols using validated written or comput-
erized provider order entry sets for management of dysglycemia in the hospital
(including emergency department, intensive care unit [ICU] and non-ICU wards,
gynecology-obstetrics/delivery units, dialysis suites, and behavioral health units)
that allow for a personalized approach, including glucose monitoring, insulin and/
or noninsulin therapy, hypoglycemia management, diabetes self-management educa-
tion, nutrition recommendations, and transitions of care. B
Considerations on Admission
High-quality hospital care for diabetes requires standards for care delivery, which are
best implemented using structured order sets and quality improvement strategies for
*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee. 16. Diabetes care
in the hospital: Standards of Care in Diabetes—
2024. Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S295–S306
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
16. DIABETES CARE IN THE HOSPITAL
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
S295
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

process improvement. Unfortunately, “best
practice” protocols, reviews, and guidelines
are inconsistently implemented within hos-
pitals (2). To correct this, medical centers
striving for optimal inpatient diabetes
treatment should establish protocols and
structured order sets, which include com-
puterized provider order entry (CPOE).
Institutions are encouraged to perform
audits regularly to monitor proper use and
institute educational/training programs to
keep staff up to date.
Initial evaluation should state the type
of diabetes (i.e., type 1, type 2, gesta-
tional, pancreatogenic, drug related, or
nutrition related) when it is known. Be-
cause inpatient treatment and discharge
planning are more effective when pread-
mission glycemia is considered, A1C
should be measured for all people with
diabetes or dysglycemia admitted to the
hospital if no A1C test result is available
from the previous 3 months (3–6). In
addition, diabetes self-management
knowledge and behaviors should be as-
sessed on admission, and diabetes self-
management
education
provided
(if
available), especially if a new treatment
plan is being considered. Diabetes self-
management education should include
knowledge and survival skills needed af-
ter discharge, such as medication dosing
and administration, glucose monitoring,
and recognition and treatment of hypo-
glycemia (7). Evidence supports pread-
mission treatment of hyperglycemia in
people scheduled for elective surgery as an
effective means of reducing adverse out-
comes (8–11).
The National Academy of Medicine rec-
ommends CPOE to prevent medication-
related errors and to increase medication
administration efﬁciency (12). Systematic
reviews of randomized controlled trials
using computerized advice to improve
glycemic outcomes in the hospital found
signiﬁcant improvement in the percent-
age of time individuals spent in the gly-
cemic goal range, lower mean blood
glucose levels, and no increase in hypo-
glycemia (13). Where feasible, there
should be structured order sets that pro-
vide computerized guidance for glycemic
management. Insulin dosing algorithms
using machine learning and data in the
electronic health record (EHR) currently
in development show promise for pre-
dicting
insulin
requirements
during
hospitalization (14).
Diabetes Care Specialists in the
Hospital
Recommendation
16.3 When caring for hospitalized peo-
ple with diabetes (with an existing or
new diagnosis) or stress hyperglycemia,
consult with a specialized diabetes or
glucose management team when ac-
cessible. B
Care provided by appropriately trained
specialists or specialty teams may reduce
the length of stay and improve glycemic
and other clinical outcomes (15,16). In ad-
dition, the increased risk of 30-day read-
mission following hospitalization that has
been attributed to diabetes can be re-
duced, and costs saved, when inpatient
care is provided by a specialized diabetes
management team (15,17,18). In a cross-
sectional study comparing usual care to
specialists reviewing diabetes cases and
making recommendations virtually through
the EHR, rates of both hyperglycemia and
hypoglycemia were reduced by 30–40%
(19). Providing inpatient diabetes self-
management education and developing a
diabetes discharge plan that includes con-
tinued access to diabetes medications
and supplies and ongoing education and
support are key strategies to improve out-
comes (20,21). Details of diabetes care
team composition and other resources
are available from the Joint Commission
accreditation program for the hospital
care of diabetes, from the Society of Hos-
pital Medicine workbook, and from the
Joint British Diabetes Societies (JBDS) for
Inpatient Care Group (22–24).
GLYCEMIC GOALS IN
HOSPITALIZED ADULTS
Recommendations
16.4 Insulin A and/or other therapies
B should be initiated or intensiﬁed for
treatment of persistent hyperglycemia
starting at a threshold of $180 mg/dL
($10.0 mmol/L) (conﬁrmed on two
occasions within 24 h) for noncritically
ill (non-ICU) individuals. A
16.5a Once therapy is initiated, a
glycemic goal of 140–180 mg/dL
(7.8–10.0 mmol/L) is recommended
for most critically ill (ICU) individuals
with hyperglycemia. A
16.5b Morestringent glycemic goals, such
as 110–140 mg/dL (6.1–7.8 mmol/L),
may be appropriate for selected
critically ill individuals and are accept-
able if they can be achieved without
signiﬁcant hypoglycemia. B
Standard Deﬁnitions of Glucose
Abnormalities
Hyperglycemia in hospitalized individuals is
deﬁned as blood glucose levels >140 mg/dL
(>7.8 mmol/L) (2). An admission A1C value
$6.5% ($48 mmol/mol) suggests that
the onset of diabetes preceded hospitali-
zation (see Section 2, “Diagnosis and
Classiﬁcation of Diabetes”). Level 1 hypo-
glycemia is deﬁned as a glucose concen-
tration of 54–69 mg/dL (3.0–3.8 mmol/L).
Level 2 hypoglycemia is deﬁned as
a glucose concentration <54 mg/dL
(<3.0 mmol/L), which is typically the
threshold for neuroglycopenic symptoms.
Level 3 hypoglycemia is deﬁned as a clini-
cal event characterized by altered mental
and/or physical functioning that requires
assistance from another person for recov-
ery (Table 6.4) (25,26). Levels 2 and 3
require immediate intervention and cor-
rection of low blood glucose. Prompt
treatment of level 1 hypoglycemia is
recommended as an effort to prevent
progression to more signiﬁcant level 2
and level 3 hypoglycemia.
Glycemic Goals
In a landmark clinical trial conducted in a
surgical intensive care unit (ICU), Van
den Berghe et al. (27) demonstrated that
an intensive intravenous insulin protocol
with a glycemic goal of 80–110 mg/dL
(4.4–6.1 mmol/L) reduced mortality by
40% compared with a standard approach
of a glycemic goal of 180–215 mg/dL
(10–12 mmol/L) in critically ill hospitalized
individuals with recent surgery. This study
provided evidence that active treatment
to lower blood glucose in hospitalized in-
dividuals could have immediate beneﬁts.
However, a large, multicenter follow-up
study in critically ill hospitalized individu-
als, the Normoglycemia in Intensive Care
Evaluation and Survival Using Glucose
Algorithm Regulation (NICE-SUGAR) trial
(28), led to a reconsideration of the opti-
mal glucose lowering goal in critical illness.
In this trial, critically ill individuals random-
ized to intensive glycemic management
(80–110 mg/dL [4.4–6.1 mmol/L]) derived
no
signiﬁcant
treatment
advantage
compared with a group with more mod-
erate glycemic goals (140–180 mg/dL
[7.8–10.0 mmol/L]) and had slightly but
S296
Diabetes Care in the Hospital
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

signiﬁcantly higher mortality (27.5% vs.
25%). The intensively treated group had
10- to 15-fold greater rates of hypogly-
cemia, which may have contributed to
the adverse outcomes noted. The ﬁndings
from the NICE-SUGAR trial, supported by
several meta-analyses and a randomized
controlled trial, showed higher rates of hy-
poglycemia and an increase in mortality
with more aggressive glycemic manage-
ment goals compared with moderate
glycemic goals (29–31). Based on these re-
sults, insulin and/or other therapies should
be initiated for the treatment of persis-
tent hyperglycemia $180 mg/dL ($10.0
mmol/L). Once therapy is initiated, a gly-
cemic goal of 140–180 mg/dL (7.8–10.0
mmol/L) is recommended for most critically
ill individuals with hyperglycemia. Although
not as well supported by data from random-
ized controlled trials, these recommenda-
tions have been extended to hospitalized
individuals without critical illness. More
stringent glycemic goals, such as 110–140
mg/dL (6.1–7.8 mmol/L), may be appropri-
ate for selected individuals (e.g., critically ill
individuals undergoing surgery) if it can be
achieved without signiﬁcant hypoglycemia
(32,33).
For inpatient management of hypergly-
cemia in noncritical care settings, a glycemic
goal of 100–180 mg/dL (5.6–10.0 mmol/L)
is recommended, whether it is new hyper-
glycemia (e.g., newly diagnosed diabetes
or stress hyperglycemia) or hyperglycemia
related to diabetes prior to admission (2).
It has been found that fasting glucose
levels <100 mg/dL (<5.6 mmol/L) are
predictors of hypoglycemia within the
next 24 h (34). Glycemic levels up to 250
mg/dL (13.9 mmol/L) may be acceptable
in selected populations (terminally ill indi-
viduals with short life expectancy, ad-
vanced kidney failure [and/or on dialysis],
high risk for hypoglycemia, and/or labile
glycemic excursions). In these individu-
als, less aggressive treatment goals that
would help avoid symptomatic hypogly-
cemia and/or hyperglycemia are often
appropriate. Clinical judgment combined
with ongoing assessment of clinical sta-
tus, including changes in the trajectory of
glucose measures, illness severity, nutri-
tional status, or concomitant medications
that might affect glucose levels (e.g., gluco-
corticoids), may be incorporated into the
day-to-day decisions regarding treatment
dosing.
GLUCOSE MONITORING
In hospitalized individuals with diabetes
who are eating, point-of-care (POC) blood
glucose monitoring should be performed
before meals; in those not eating, glucose
monitoring is advised every 4–6 h (26).
More frequent POC blood glucose moni-
toring ranging from every 30 min to every
2 h is the required standard for safe use
of intravenous insulin therapy.
Hospital blood glucose monitoring should
be performed with U.S. Food and Drug Ad-
ministration (FDA)–approved POC hospital-
calibrated glucose monitoring systems (35).
POC blood glucose meters are not as accu-
rate or as precise as laboratory glucose ana-
lyzers, and capillary blood glucose readings
are subject to artifacts due to perfusion,
edema, anemia/erythrocytosis, and several
medications commonly used in the hospital
(35) (Table 7.1). The FDA has established
standards for capillary (ﬁnger-stick) POC glu-
cose monitoring in the hospital (35).The bal-
ance between analytic requirements (e.g.,
accuracy, precision, and interference) and
clinical requirements (e.g., rapidity, simplic-
ity, and POC) has not been uniformly re-
solved (35–38), and most hospitals have
arrived at their own policies to balance
these parameters. It is critically important
that devices selected for in-hospital use, and
the workﬂow through which they are ap-
plied, undergo careful analysis of perfor-
mance and reliability and ongoing quality
assessments (38). Recent studies indicate
that POC measures provide adequate infor-
mation for usual practice, with only rare in-
stances where care has been compromised
(36,37). Best practice dictates that any glu-
cose result that does not correlate with the
individual’s clinical status should be con-
ﬁrmed by measuring a sample in the clinical
laboratory, particularly for asymptomatic hy-
poglycemic events.
Continuous Glucose Monitoring
Recommendations
16.6 In people with diabetes using a
personal continuous glucose monitor-
ing (CGM) device, the use of CGM
should be continued during hospitali-
zation if clinically appropriate, with
conﬁrmatory point-of-care (POC) glu-
cose measurements for insulin dosing
decisions and hypoglycemia assess-
ment, if resources and training are
available, and according to an institu-
tional protocol. B
16.7 For people with diabetes using an
automated insulin delivery (AID) system
along with CGM, the use of AID and
CGM should be continued during hospi-
talization if clinically appropriate, with
conﬁrmatory POC blood glucose meas-
urements for insulin dosing decisions
and hypoglycemia assessment, if resour-
ces and training are available, and ac-
cording to an institutional protocol. C
Several studies have demonstrated that
inpatient use of continuous glucose moni-
toring (CGM) has advantages over POC
glucose monitoring in detecting hypogly-
cemia, particularly nocturnal, prolonged
and/or asymptomatic hypoglycemia (39–41),
and in reducing recurrent hypoglycemia
(42,43). However, at this time, initiating
use of a new CGM device has not been
approved by the FDA. During the corona-
virus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic,
many institutions used CGM in ICU and
non-ICU settings, with the aim of mini-
mizing exposure time and saving personal
protective equipment, under an FDA pol-
icy of enforcement discretion (44,45). Data
on the safety and efﬁcacy of real-time
CGM use in the hospital, particularly with
implementation of remote monitoring
(e.g., a glucose telemetry system), is
growing (42,43,45–50).
Continuation of personal CGM device
use, particularly for people with type 1 or
type 2 diabetes treated with intensive ther-
apy at increased risk for hypoglycemia
during hospitalization, is recommended.
Conﬁrmatory POC capillary glucose test-
ing, using hospital-calibrated glucose me-
ters, is recommended for insulin dosing
and hypoglycemia assessment (e.g., hy-
brid testing protocols) (51). People with
diabetes should be counseled about
meaningful use of trend arrows and
alarms and about notifying nursing staff
for conﬁrmation of these events with
POC capillary glucose testing. Similarly,
continuation of AID systems should be
supported during hospitalization, when
clinically appropriate, and with proper
staff training and supervision (41,45). Ob-
servational studies have demonstrated
improvements in patient satisfaction and
improved detection of glycemic excursions
(40,47). If the reason for admission is sus-
pected to be related to device malfunction
or lack of adequate education/training or
use, consultation with the endocrinology/
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diabetes Care in the Hospital
S297
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

diabetes care team or diabetes care and
education specialists, if available, is rec-
ommended. Hospitals are encouraged to
develop institutional policies and have
trained personnel with knowledge of dia-
betes technology. Recent review articles
provide details on accuracy, interfer-
ences, precautions, and contraindications
of diabetes technology devices in the
hospital setting (50,51).
For more information on CGM, see
Section 7, “Diabetes Technology.”
GLUCOSE-LOWERING TREATMENT
IN HOSPITALIZED PATIENTS
An individualized approach for glycemic
management is encouraged throughout
the hospital stay and should take into
consideration several predictive factors
for achieving glycemic goals, such as
prior home use and dose of insulin or
noninsulin therapy, expected level of in-
sulin resistance, prior A1C, current glu-
cose levels, oral intake, and duration of
diabetes.
Insulin Therapy
Recommendations
16.8 Basal insulin or a basal plus bolus
correction insulin plan is the preferred
treatment for noncritically ill hospital-
ized individuals with poor oral intake
or those who are taking nothing by
mouth. A
16.9 An insulin plan with basal, pran-
dial, and correction components is the
preferred treatment for most noncriti-
cally ill hospitalized individuals with
adequate nutritional intake. A
16.10 Sole use of a correction or
supplemental insulin without basal
insulin (formerly referred to as a
sliding scale) in the inpatient setting
is discouraged. A
Critical Care Setting
Continuous intravenous insulin infusion
is the most effective method for achiev-
ing speciﬁc glycemic goals and avoiding
hypoglycemia in the critical care setting.
Intravenous insulin infusions should be
administered using validated written or
computerized protocols that allow for
predeﬁned adjustments in the insulin in-
fusion rate based on glycemic ﬂuctua-
tions and immediate past and current
insulin infusion rates (52). For diabetic
ketoacidosis
(DKA)
and
hyperglycemic
hyperosmolar state (HHS) management,
continuous intravenous insulin infusion is
given for correction of hyperglycemia, hyper-
ketonemia, and acid-base disorder following
a ﬁxed-rate intravenous insulin infusion (53)
or nurse-driven protocol with a variable rate
based on glucose values (54). Individuals
with mild and uncomplicated DKA can be
managed with subcutaneous rapid-acting in-
sulin doses given every 1–2 h (55).
Noncritical Care Setting
In most instances, insulin is the preferred
treatment for hyperglycemia in hospital-
ized individuals. In certain circumstances,
it may be appropriate to continue home
oral glucose-lowering medications, such
as dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors (DPP-4i)
(52,56). If oral medications are held in the
hospital but will be reinstated after dis-
charge, there should be a protocol for
guiding resumption of home medications
1–2 days prior to discharge. For people
taking insulin, several reports indicate that
inpatient use of insulin pens is safe and
may improve nurse satisfaction when
safety protocols, including nursing edu-
cation, are in place to guarantee single-
person use (57–61).
Outside of critical care units, scheduled
subcutaneous insulin orders are recom-
mended for the management of hyper-
glycemia in people with diabetes and
hyperglycemia. Use of insulin analogs or
human insulin results in similar glycemic
outcomes in the hospital setting but may
increase severe hypoglycemic events (62).
The use of subcutaneous rapid- or short-
acting insulin before meals, or every 4–6 h
if no meals are given or if the individual is
receiving continuous enteral/parenteral
nutrition, is indicated to correct or pre-
vent hyperglycemia. Basal insulin, or a
basal plus bolus correction schedule, is
the preferred treatment for noncritically
ill hospitalized individuals with inadequate
or restricted oral intake. An insulin sched-
ule with basal, prandial, and correction
components is the preferred treatment
for most noncritically ill hospitalized people
with diabetes with adequate nutritional
intake.
A randomized controlled trial has shown
that basal plus bolus treatment improved
glycemic outcomes and reduced hospital
complications compared with a correction
or supplemental insulin without basal insu-
lin (formerly known as sliding scale) for
people with type 2 diabetes admitted for
general surgery (63). Prolonged use of
correction or supplemental insulin without
basal insulin as the sole treatment of hy-
perglycemia is strongly discouraged in the
inpatient setting, with the exception of
people with type 2 diabetes in noncritical
care with mild hyperglycemia (2,64,65).
A
prospective
randomized
inpatient
study of 70/30 intermediate-acting (NPH)/
regular insulin mixture versus basal-bolus
therapy showed comparable glycemic out-
comes but signiﬁcantly increased hypogly-
cemia in the group receiving insulin mixture
(66).Therefore, insulin mixtures such as 75/
25, 70/30, or 50/50 insulins are not rou-
tinely recommended for in-hospital use.
Data on the use of glargine U-300
and degludec U-100 or U-200 in the in-
patient and perioperative settings are
limited. A few studies have shown that
they demonstrated similar efﬁcacy and
safety compared with glargine U-100
(67–69). At this time, there is no avail-
able evidence for weekly insulin use in
hospital or surgical settings.
Type 1 Diabetes
For people with type 1 diabetes, dosing
insulin based solely on premeal glucose
levels does not account for basal insulin
requirements or caloric intake, increasing
the risk of both hypoglycemia and hyper-
glycemia. Typically, basal insulin dosing is
based on body weight and expected sen-
sitivity to insulin, with some evidence
that
people
with
renal
insufﬁciency
should be treated with lower insulin
doses (70,71). An insulin schedule with
basal and correction components is nec-
essary for all hospitalized individuals with
type 1 diabetes, even when taking noth-
ing by mouth, with the addition of pran-
dial insulin when eating. Policies and best
practice alerts in the EHR should be put in
place to ensure that basal insulin (given
subcutaneously, via insulin pump or by in-
sulin infusion) is not held for people with
type 1 diabetes, especially during care
transitions, and that ongoing prescriber
and nursing education is provided (60).
Transitioning From Intravenous to
Subcutaneous Insulin
When discontinuing intravenous insulin, a
transition protocol is recommended, as it
is associated with less morbidity and
lower costs of care. Subcutaneous basal
insulin should be given 2 h before intrave-
nous infusion is discontinued, with the
aim of minimizing rebound hyperglycemia
(2,72,73).
S298
Diabetes Care in the Hospital
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Emerging data from several studies
show that the administration of a low dose
(0.15–0.3 units/kg) of basal insulin analog
in addition to intravenous insulin infusion
may reduce the duration of insulin infusion
and length of hospital stay and prevent re-
bound hyperglycemia without increased
risk of hypoglycemia (74–76).
For transitioning, the total daily dose of
subcutaneous insulin can be calculated
based on the insulin infusion rate during
the prior 6–8 h when stable glycemic goals
wereachieved, based on priorhomeinsulin
dose, or following a weight-based approach
(72,73). For people being transitioned to
concentrated insulin (U-200, U-300, or
U-500) in the inpatient setting, it is impor-
tant to ensure correctdosing by usinga sep-
arate pen or vial for each person and by
meticulous pharmacy and nursing supervi-
sion of the dose administered (77,78).
Noninsulin Therapies
Recommendation
16.11 For people with type 2 diabetes
hospitalized with heart failure, it is
recommended that use of a sodium–
glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor be
initiated or continued during hospital-
ization and upon discharge, if there
are no contraindications and after re-
covery from the acute illness. A
The safety and efﬁcacy of noninsulin
glucose-lowering therapies in the hospital
setting has expanded recently (79–83). A
randomized trial and an observational study
have demonstrated the safety and efﬁcacy
of DPP-4i in speciﬁc groups of hospitalized
people with diabetes (84,85). The use of
DPP-4i with or without basal insulin may be
a safer and simpler plan for people with
mild to moderate hyperglycemia on admis-
sion (e.g., admission glucose <180–200
mg/dL), with reduced risk of hypoglycemia
(79,85,86). Of note, the FDA states that
health care professionals should consider
discontinuing saxagliptin and alogliptin in
people who develop heart failure (87). Data
on the inpatient use of glucagon-like pep-
tide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists are still
mostlylimitedtoresearchstudiesandselect
populations that are medically stable (83).
For people with type 2 diabetes hospital-
ized with heart failure, it is recommended
that use of a sodium–glucose cotransporter
2 (SGLT2) inhibitor be initiated or continued
during hospitalization and upon discharge,
if there are no contraindications and after
recovery from the acute illness (88,89).
SGLT2 inhibitors should be avoided in cases
of severe illness, in people with ketonemia
or ketonuria, and during prolonged fasting
and surgical procedures (90–93). Proac-
tive adjustment of diuretic dosing is rec-
ommended during hospitalization and/or
discharge, especially in collaboration with
a cardiology/heart failure consult team
(90–93). The FDA has warned that SGLT2
inhibitors should be stopped 3 days before
scheduled surgeries (4 days in the case of
ertugliﬂozin) (94).
HYPOGLYCEMIA
Recommendations
16.12 A hypoglycemia management
protocol should be adopted and imple-
mented by each hospital or hospital
system. A plan for preventing and treat-
ing hypoglycemia should be established
for each individual. Episodes of hypo-
glycemia in the hospital should be
documented in the electronic health
record and tracked for quality assess-
ment and quality improvement. E
16.13 Treatment plans should be re-
viewed and changed as necessary to
prevent hypoglycemia and recurrent
hypoglycemia when a blood glucose
value of <70 mg/dL (<3.9 mmol/L) is
documented. C
People with or without diabetes may ex-
perience hypoglycemia in the hospital
setting. While hypoglycemia is associated
with increased mortality (95,96), in many
cases, it is a marker of an underlying dis-
ease rather than the cause of fatality.
However, hypoglycemia is a severe conse-
quence of dysregulated metabolism and/or
diabetes treatment, and it is imperative
that it be minimized during hospitalization.
Many episodes of inpatient hypoglycemia
are preventable. A hypoglycemia preven-
tion and management protocol should be
adopted and implemented by each hos-
pital or hospital system. A standardized
hospital-wide, nurse-initiated hypoglycemia
treatment protocol should be in place to
immediately address blood glucose levels
<70 mg/dL (<3.9 mmol/L) (97,98). In addi-
tion, individualized plans for preventing
and treating hypoglycemia for each individ-
ual should also be developed. An American
Diabetes Association consensus statement
recommends that an individual’s treatment
plan be reviewed any time a blood glucose
value of <70 mg/dL (<3.9 mmol/L) occurs,
asthis level often predicts subsequent level
3 hypoglycemia (99). Episodes of hypoglyce-
mia in the hospital should be documented
in the EHR and tracked (1). A key strategy is
embedding hypoglycemia treatment into all
insulin and insulin infusion orders.
Inpatient Hypoglycemia: Risk
Factors, Treatment, and Prevention
Insulin is one of the most common medi-
cations causing adverse events in hospital-
ized individuals. Errors in insulin dosing,
missed doses, and/or administration errors
including incorrect insulin type and incor-
rect timing of dose occur relatively fre-
quently (100–102) and include prescriber
(ordering), pharmacy (dispensing), and
nursing (administration) errors. Common
preventable sources of iatrogenic hypogly-
cemia are improper prescribing of other
glucose-lowering medications and inap-
propriate management and follow-up of
the ﬁrst episode of hypoglycemia (103). Kid-
ney failure is an important risk factor for hy-
poglycemia in the hospital (104), possibly
as a result of decreased insulin clearance.
Studies of “bundled” preventive therapies,
including proactive surveillance of glycemic
outliers and an interdisciplinary data-driven
approach to glycemic management, showed
that hypoglycemic episodes in the hospi-
tal could be reduced or prevented. Com-
pared with baseline, studies found that
hypoglycemic
events
decreased
by
56–80% (98,105,106). The Joint Commis-
sion, a global quality improvement and
patient safety in health care organiza-
tion, recommends that all hypoglycemic
episodes be evaluated for a root cause
and the episodes be aggregated and re-
viewed to address systemic issues (23).
In additiontoerrorswithinsulintreatment,
iatrogenic hypoglycemia may be induced by a
sudden reduction of corticosteroid dose,
reduced oral intake, emesis, inappropriate
timing of short- or rapid-acting insulin
doses in relation to meals, reduced infusion
rate of intravenous dextrose, unexpected
interruption ofenteral or parenteral feedings,
delayed or missed blood glucose checks, and
altered ability of the individual to report
symptoms (107).
Recent inpatient studies show promise
for CGM as an early warning system to
alert of impending hypoglycemia, offering
an opportunity to mitigate it before it hap-
pens (46–49). The use of personal CGM
and AID devices, such as insulin pumps
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diabetes Care in the Hospital
S299
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

that can automatically deliver correction
doses and change basal delivery rates in
real time, should be supported for ongo-
ing use during hospitalization for individu-
als who are capable of using their devices
safely and independently when proper
oversight supervision is available. Hospi-
tals should be encouraged to develop poli-
cies and protocols to support inpatient
use of individual- and hospital-owned dia-
betes technology and have expert staff
available for safe implementation and
evaluation of continued use during the
hospital stay (51). Hospital information
technology teams are beginning to inte-
grate CGM data into the EHR. The ability
to download and interpret diabetes de-
vice data during hospitalization can inform
insulin dosing during hospitalization and
care transitions (41).
For more information on CGM, see
Section 7, “Diabetes Technology.”
Predictors of Hypoglycemia
In people with diabetes, it is well established
that an episode of severe hypoglycemia in-
creases the risk for a subsequent event,
partly because of impaired counterregula-
tion (108,109). In a study of hospitalized
individuals, 84% of people who had an epi-
sode of severe hypoglycemia (deﬁned as
<40 mg/dL [<2.2 mmol/L]) had a preced-
ing episode of hypoglycemia (<70 mg/dL
[<3.9 mmol/L]) during the same admis-
sion (110). In another study of hypoglyce-
mic episodes (deﬁned as <50 mg/dL
[<2.8 mmol/L]), 78% of individuals were
taking basal insulin, with the incidence of
hypoglycemia peaking between midnight
and 6:00 A.M. Despite recognition of hypo-
glycemia, 75% of individuals did not have
their dose of basal insulin changed before
the next basal insulin administration (111).
Recently, several groups have devel-
oped algorithms to predict episodes of
hypoglycemia in the inpatient setting
(112,113). Models such as these are po-
tentially important and, once validated
for general use, could provide a valu-
able tool to reduce rates of hypoglyce-
mia in the hospital. In one retrospective
cohort study, a fasting blood glucose of
<100 mg/dL was shown to be a predic-
tor of next-day hypoglycemia (34).
MEDICAL NUTRITION THERAPY IN
THE HOSPITAL
The goals of medical nutrition therapy
in the hospital are to provide adequate
calories to meet metabolic demands, opti-
mize glycemic outcomes, address personal
food preferences, and facilitate the crea-
tion of a discharge plan.The American Di-
abetes Association does not endorse any
single meal plan or speciﬁed percentages
of macronutrients. Current nutrition rec-
ommendations advise individualization
based on treatment goals, physiological
parameters, and medication use. Con-
trolled carbohydrate meal plans, where
the amount of carbohydrate on each
meal tray is calculated, are preferred by
many hospitals, as they facilitate match-
ing the prandial insulin dose to the
amount of carbohydrate given (114). Or-
ders should also indicate that the meal
delivery and nutritional insulin coverage
should be coordinated, as their variability
often creates the possibility of hypergly-
cemic and hypoglycemic events (20).
Some hospitals offer “meals on demand,”
where individuals may order meals from
the menu at any time during the day.This
option improves patient satisfaction but
complicates
insulin–meal
coordination
and can lead to insulin stacking if meals
are too close together. Finally, if the hos-
pital food service supports carbohydrate
counting, this option should be made
available to people with diabetes count-
ing carbohydrates at home and people
wearing insulin pumps (115,116).
SELF-MANAGEMENT IN THE
HOSPITAL
Diabetes self-management in the hospital
may be appropriate for speciﬁc individuals
who wish to continue to perform self-care
while acutely ill (117–119). Candidates in-
clude children with parental supervision,
adolescents, and adults who successfully
perform diabetes self-management at
home and whose cognitive and physical
skills needed to successfully self-administer
insulin and perform glucose monitoring are
not compromised (7,41). In addition, they
should have adequate oral intake, be proﬁ-
cient in carbohydrate estimation, take mul-
tiple daily insulin injections or wear insulin
pumps, have stable insulin requirements,
and understand sick-day management. If
self-management is supported, a policy
should include a requirement that people
with diabetes and the care team agree
that self-management is appropriate on a
daily basis during hospitalization. Hospital
personal medication policies may include
guidance for people with diabetes who
wish to take their own or hospital-dispensed
insulin and noninsulin injectable medica-
tions during their hospital stay. A hospital
policy for personal medication may consider
a pharmacy exception on a case-by-case ba-
sis along with the care team. Pharmacy
must verify any home medication and re-
quire a prescriber order for the individual
to self-administer home or hospital-
dispensed medication under the su-
pervision of the registered nurse. If an
insulin pump or CGM device is worn,
hospital policy and procedures delin-
eating guidelines for wearing an insulin
pump and/or CGM device should be de-
veloped according to consensus guide-
lines, including the changing of insulin
infusion sites and CGM glucose sensors
(41,120,121). As outlined in Recommenda-
tions 7.33 and 7.34, people with diabetes
wearing diabetes devices should be sup-
ported to continue them in an inpatient
setting if they are assessed and deemed
competent to perform self-care and proper
supervision is available.
STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL
SITUATIONS
Enteral/Parenteral Feedings
For individuals receiving enteral or parenteral
feedings who require insulin, the insulin or-
ders should include coverage of basal, pran-
dial, and correctional needs (115,122,123).
It is essential that people with type 1 diabe-
tes continue to receive basal insulin even if
feedings are discontinued.
Most adults receiving basal insulin
should continue with their basal dose,
while the insulin dose for the total daily
nutritional component may be calculated
as 1 unit of insulin for every 10–15 g of
carbohydrate in the enteral and paren-
teral formulas. Commercially available
cans of enteral nutrition contain variable
amounts of carbohydrates and may be
infused at different rates.
All of this must be considered when
calculating insulin doses to cover the nu-
tritional component of enteral nutrition
(116). Giving NPH insulin two or three
times daily (every 8 or 12 h) to cover indi-
vidual requirements is a reasonable op-
tion. Adjustments in insulin doses should
be made frequently. Correctional insulin
should also be administered subcutane-
ously every 6 h with regular human insu-
lin. If enteral nutrition is interrupted, a
dextrose infusion should be started im-
mediately to prevent hypoglycemia and
S300
Diabetes Care in the Hospital
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

to allow time to determine more appro-
priate insulin doses.
For adults receiving enteral bolus feed-
ings, approximately 1 unit of regular human
insulin or rapid-acting insulin per every
10–15 g of carbohydrate should be given
subcutaneously before each feeding.To mit-
igate any hyperglycemia, correctional insu-
lin should be added as needed before each
feeding.
In individuals receiving nocturnal tube
feeding, NPH insulin administered along
with the initiation of the feeding is a rea-
sonable approach to cover this nutritional
load.
For individuals receiving continuous pe-
ripheral or central parenteral nutrition,
human regular insulin may be added to
the solution, particularly if >20 units of
correctional insulin have been required in
the past 24 h. A starting dose of 1 unit of
regular human insulin for every 10 g of
dextrose has been recommended (105)
and should be adjusted daily in the solu-
tion. Adding insulin to the parenteral nu-
trition bag is the safest way to prevent
hypoglycemia if the parenteral nutrition is
stopped or interrupted. Correctional insu-
lin should be administered subcutane-
ously to address any hyperglycemia.
Because continuous enteral or parenteral
nutrition results in a continuous postpran-
dial state, efforts to bring blood glucose
levels to below 140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L)
substantially increase the risk of hypoglyce-
mia in these individuals. For full enteral/
parenteral feeding guidance, please refer
to randomized controlled trials detailing
this topic (122,124).
Glucocorticoid Therapy
The prevalence of consistent use of gluco-
corticoid therapy in hospitalized individuals
can approach 10–15%, and these medica-
tions can induce hyperglycemia in 56–86%
of these individuals with and without
preexisting diabetes (125–127). If left un-
treated, this hyperglycemia increases mor-
tality and morbidity risk, e.g., infections
and cardiovascular events. Glucocorticoid
type and duration of action must be con-
sidered in determining appropriate insulin
treatments. Daily-ingested intermediate-
acting glucocorticoids such as prednisone
reach peak plasma levels in 4–6 h (128)
but have pharmacologic actions that can
last throughout the day. Individuals placed
on morning steroid therapy have dispro-
portionate hyperglycemia during the day
but frequently reach blood glucose goals
overnight regardless of treatment (125). In
individuals on once- or twice-daily steroids,
administering NPH insulin is a standard
approach. NPH is usually administered in
addition to daily basal-bolus insulin or in
addition to oral glucose-lowering medica-
tions, depending on the type of diabetes
and recent diabetes medication prior to
starting steroids. Because NPH action
peaks about 4–6 h after administration, it
is recommended that it be administered
concomitantly with intermediate-acting
steroids (129). For long-acting glucocorti-
coids such as dexamethasone and multi-
dose or continuous glucocorticoid use,
long-acting basal insulin may be required
to manage fasting blood glucose levels
(53,130). For higher doses of glucocorti-
coids, increasing doses of prandial (if eat-
ing) and correction insulin, sometimes as
much as 40–60% or more, are often
needed in addition to basal insulin
(131,132). A retrospective study found
that increasing the ratio of insulin to
steroids was positively associated with
improved time in range (70–180 mg/dL);
however, there was an increase in hypo-
glycemia (133). If insulin orders are initi-
ated, daily adjustments based on levels
of glycemia and anticipated changes in
type, dosages, and duration of glucocor-
ticoids, along with POC blood glucose
monitoring, are critical to reducing hypo-
glycemia and hyperglycemia.
Perioperative Care
It is estimated that up to 20% of individu-
als undergoing general surgery have dia-
betes, and 23–60% have prediabetes or
undiagnosed diabetes. Surgical stress and
counterregulatory hormone release in-
crease the risk of hyperglycemia as well
as mortality, infection, and length of stay
(134–136). There are little data available
to guide care of people with diabetes
through the perioperative period.To reduce
surgical risk in people with diabetes, some
institutions (135,137,138) have A1C cutoffs
for elective surgeries, and some have devel-
oped optimization programs to lower A1C
prior to surgery (134,135,137,138).
The following approach (134,135,137)
may be considered:
1. A preoperative risk assessment should
be performed for people with diabe-
tes who are at high risk for ischemic
heart disease and those with auto-
nomic neuropathy or renal failure.
2. The A1C goal for elective surgeries
should be <8% (<63.9 mmol/L) when-
ever possible.
3. The blood glucose goal in the periopera-
tive period should be 100–180 mg/dL
(5.6–10.0 mmol/L) (135) within 4 h
of the surgery. CGM should not be
used alone for glucose monitoring dur-
ing surgery (138).
4. Metformin should be held on the
day of surgery.
5. SGLT2 inhibitors should be discon-
tinued 3–4 days before surgery.
6. Hold other oral glucose-lowering agents
the morning of surgery or procedure
and give one-half of NPH dose or
75–80% doses of long-acting analog in-
sulin or adjust insulin pump basal rates
based on the type of diabetes and clini-
cal judgment.
7. Monitor blood glucose at least every
2–4 h while the individual takes noth-
ing by mouth and dose with short- or
rapid-acting insulin as needed.
8. There are little data on the safe use
and/or inﬂuence of GLP-1 receptor
agonists on glycemia and delayed
gastric emptying in the perioperative
period.
9. Stricter perioperative glycemic goals
are not advised, as perioperative glyce-
mic goals stricter than 80–180 mg/dL
(4.4–10.0 mmol/L) may not improve
outcomes and are associated with
more hypoglycemia (137).
10. Compared with usual dosing, a reduc-
tion by 25% of basal insulin given the
evening before surgery is more likely
to achieve perioperative blood glucose
goals with a lower risk for hypoglyce-
mia (139).
11. In individuals undergoing noncardiac
general surgery, basal insulin plus
premeal short- or rapid-acting insulin
(basal-bolus) coverage has been
associated with improved glycemic out-
comes and lower rates of perioperative
complications compared with the re-
active, correction-only short- or rapid-
acting insulin coverage alone with no
basal insulin dosing (63,134,135).
Diabetic Ketoacidosis and
Hyperglycemic Hyperosmolar State
There is considerable variability in the
presentation of DKA and HHS, ranging
from euglycemia or mild hyperglycemia
and acidosis to severe hyperglycemia,
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diabetes Care in the Hospital
S301
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

dehydration, and coma; therefore, indi-
vidualization of treatment based on a
careful clinical and laboratory assess-
ment is needed (75,140–142).
Management goals include restoration
of circulatory volume and tissue perfusion,
resolution of ketoacidosis, and correction
of electrolyte imbalance and acidosis. It is
also essential to treat any correctable un-
derlying cause of DKA, such as sepsis, myo-
cardial infarction, or stroke. In critically ill
and mentally obtunded individuals with
DKA or HHS, continuous intravenous insu-
lin is the standard of care. Successful transi-
tion from intravenous to subcutaneous
insulin requires administration of basal in-
sulin 2–4 h before the intravenous insu-
lin is stopped to prevent recurrence of
ketoacidosis and rebound hyperglyce-
mia (72,73,140). Recent studies have
reported that the administration of a
low dose of basal insulin analog in addi-
tion to intravenous insulin infusion may
prevent rebound hyperglycemia without in-
creased risk of hypoglycemia (74–76,140).
There is no signiﬁcant difference in out-
comes for intravenous human regular
insulin versus subcutaneous rapid-acting
analogs when combined with aggressive
ﬂuid management for treating mild or
moderate DKA (143). Individuals with
uncomplicated DKA may sometimes be
treated with subcutaneous rapid-acting
insulin analogs in the emergency depart-
ment or step-down units (144). This ap-
proach may be safer and more cost-
effective than treatment with intravenous
insulin. If subcutaneous insulin adminis-
tration is used, it is important to provide
an adequate ﬂuid replacement, frequent
POC blood glucose monitoring, treatment
of any concurrent infections, and appro-
priate follow-up to avoid recurrent DKA.
Several studies have shown that the use
of bicarbonate in people with DKA
made no difference in the resolution
of acidosis or time to discharge, and its
use is generally not recommended
(145). For further treatment information,
refer to recent in-depth reviews (53,
107,146).
TRANSITION FROM THE HOSPITAL
TO THE AMBULATORY SETTING
Recommendation
16.14 A structured discharge plan
should be tailored to the individual
with diabetes. B
A structured discharge plan tailored to
the individual may reduce the length of
hospital stay and readmission rates and
increase satisfaction with the hospital ex-
perience (147). Multiple strategies are
key, including diabetes self-management
education prior to discharge, diabetes
medication reconciliation with attention
to access, and scheduled virtual and/or
face-to-face follow-up visits after discharge.
Discharge planning should begin at admis-
sion and be updated as individual needs
change (148,149).
The transition from the acute care set-
ting presents risks for all people with dia-
betes. Individuals may be discharged to
varied settings, including home (with or
without visiting nurse services), assisted
living, rehabilitation, or skilled nursing fa-
cilities. For individuals discharged to home
or assisted living, the optimal discharge
plan will need to consider diabetes type
and severity, effects of the illness on blood
glucose levels, and the individual’s cir-
cumstances, capabilities, and preferen-
ces (21,150,151). See Section 13, “Older
Adults,” for more information.
An outpatient follow-up visit with the
primary care clinician, endocrinologist, or
diabetes care and education specialist
within 1 month of discharge is advised for
all individuals experiencing hyperglycemia
and/or hypoglycemia in the hospital. If gly-
cemic medications are changed or glucose
management is not optimal at discharge,
an earlier appointment (in 1–2 weeks) is
preferred, and frequent contact may be
needed to avoid hyperglycemia and hypo-
glycemia. A discharge algorithm for gly-
cemic medication adjustment, based on
admission A1C, diabetes medications be-
fore admission, and insulin usage during
hospitalization was found useful to guide
treatment decisions and signiﬁcantly im-
prove A1C after discharge (4).
Clear communication with outpatient
health care professionals directly or via
hospital discharge summaries facilitates
safe transitions to outpatient care. Provid-
ing information regarding the root cause
of hyperglycemia (or the plan for determin-
ing the cause), related complications and
comorbidities, and recommended treat-
ments can assist outpatient health care
professionals as they assume ongoing care.
The Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality recommends that, at a min-
imum, discharge plans include the fol-
lowing (152):
Medication Reconciliation
• Home and hospital medications must
be cross-checked to ensure that no
chronic medications are stopped and
to ensure the safety of new and old
prescriptions.
• Prescriptions for new or changed medi-
cation should be ﬁlled and reviewed
with the individual and care partners at
or before discharge.
Structured Discharge
Communication
• Information on medication changes,
pending tests and studies, and follow-up
needs must be accurately and promptly
communicated to outpatient health care
professionals.
• Discharge summaries should be trans-
mitted to the primary care clinician as
soon as possible after discharge.
• Scheduling follow-up appointments
prior to discharge with people with dia-
betes agreeing to the time and place
increases the likelihood that they will
attend.
It is recommended that the following
areas of knowledge be reviewed and ad-
dressed before hospital discharge:
• Identiﬁcation of the health care profes-
sionals who will provide diabetes care
after discharge.
• Level of understanding related to the
diabetes diagnosis, glucose monitoring,
home glucose goals, and when to call a
health care professional.
• Deﬁnition, recognition, treatment, and
prevention of hyperglycemia and
hypoglycemia.
• Information on making healthy food
choices at home and referral to an out-
patient registered dietitian nutritionist
or diabetes care and education special-
ist to guide individualization of the
meal plan, if needed.
• When and how to take blood glu-
cose-lowering medications, including
insulin administration and noninsulin
injectables.
• Sick-day management (21,151).
• Proper use and disposal of diabetes
supplies, e.g., insulin pen, pen needles,
syringes, and lancets.
People with diabetes must be pro-
vided with appropriate durable medical
equipment, medications, supplies (e.g.,
blood
glucose
test
strips
or
CGM
S302
Diabetes Care in the Hospital
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

sensors), prescriptions, and appropriate
education at the time of discharge to
avoid a potentially dangerous hiatus in
care.
PREVENTING ADMISSIONS AND
READMISSIONS
In people with diabetes, the hospital read-
mission rate is between 14% and 20%,
which is nearly twice that in people with-
out diabetes (148,153). This may result in
increased diabetes distress and has signiﬁ-
cant ﬁnancial implications. Of people with
diabetes who are hospitalized, 30% have
two or more hospital stays, and these ad-
missions account for over 50% of hospital
costs for diabetes (154). Factors contribut-
ing to readmission include male sex,
longer duration of prior hospitalization,
number of previous hospitalizations, num-
ber and severity of comorbidities, and
lower socioeconomic and/or educational
status; factors that may reduce readmis-
sion rates include scheduled home health
visits and timely ambulatory follow-up
care (148,153). While there is no standard
to prevent readmissions, several successful
strategies have been reported that identify
high-risk individuals and offer some possi-
ble solutions (148). These include reaching
out to people with ketosis-prone diabetes
(155), insulin treatment of individuals with
admission A1C >9% (>75 mmol/mol)
(156), and the use of a transitional care
model (157). For people with diabetic
kidney disease, collaborative person-
centered medical homes may decrease
risk-adjusted readmission rates (158).
Age is also an important risk factor in
hospitalization and readmission among
people with diabetes (refer to Section 13,
“Older Adults,” for detailed criteria). Suc-
cessful proactive care transitions from in-
patient to outpatient is a key strategy for
preventing readmission.
References
1. Seisa MO, Saadi S, Nayfeh T, et al. A systematic
review supporting the Endocrine Society clinical
practice guideline for the management of
hyperglycemia in adults hospitalized for noncritical
illness or undergoing elective surgical procedures. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2022;107:2139–2147
2. ElSayed NA, Aleppo G, Aroda VR, et al.
American Diabetes Association. 16. Diabetes care
in the hospital: Standards of Care in Diabetes—
2023. Diabetes Care 2023;46(Suppl. 1):S267–S278
3. Pasquel FJ, Gomez-Huelgas R, Anzola I, et al.
Predictive value of admission hemoglobin A1c on
inpatient glycemic control and response to insulin
therapy in medicine and surgery patients with type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2015;38:e202–e203
4. Umpierrez GE, Reyes D, Smiley D, et al.
Hospital discharge algorithm based on admission
HbA1c for the management of patients with type
2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2014;37:2934–2939
5. Carpenter DL, Gregg SR, Xu K, Buchman TG,
Coopersmith CM. Prevalence and impact of
unknown diabetes in the ICU. Crit Care Med
2015;43:e541–e550
6. Nanayakkara N, Nguyen H, Churilov L, et al.
Inpatient HbA1c testing: a prospective observational
study. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 2015;3:e000113
7. Nassar CM, Montero A, Magee MF. Inpatient
diabetes education in the real world: an overview
of guidelines and delivery models. Curr Diab Rep
2019;19:103
8. Garg R, Schuman B, Bader A, et al. Effect of
preoperative diabetes management on glycemic
control and clinical outcomes after elective surgery.
Ann Surg 2018;267:858–862
9. van den Boom W, Schroeder RA, Manning
MW, Setji TL, Fiestan GO, Dunson DB. Effect of
A1C and glucose on postoperative mortality in
noncardiac and cardiac surgeries. Diabetes Care
2018;41:782–788
10. Setji T, Hopkins TJ, Jimenez M, et al.
Rationalization, development, and implementation
of a preoperative diabetes optimization program
designed to improve perioperative outcomes and
reduce cost. Diabetes Spectr 2017;30:217–223
11. Okabayashi T, Shima Y, Sumiyoshi T, et al.
Intensive versus intermediate glucose control in
surgical intensive care unit patients. Diabetes
Care 2014;37:1516–1524
12. Institute of Medicine. Preventing Medication
Errors.
Aspden
P,
Wolcott
J,
Bootman
JL,
Cronenwett LR, Eds. Washington, DC, National
Academies Press, 2007
13. Sly B, Russell AW, Sullivan C. Digital inter-
ventions to improve safety and quality of
inpatient diabetes management: a systematic
review. Int J Med Inform 2022;157:104596
14. Nguyen M, Jankovic I, Kalesinskas L, Baiocchi
M, Chen JH. Machine learning for initial insulin
estimation in hospitalized patients. J Am Med
Inform Assoc 2021;28:2212–2219
15. Akiboye F, Sihre HK, Al Mulhem M, Rayman
G, Nirantharakumar K, Adderley NJ. Impact of
diabetes specialist nurses on inpatient care: a
systematic review. Diabet Med 2021;38:e14573
16. Wang YJ, Seggelke S, Hawkins RM, et al.
Impact of glucose management team on outcomes
of hospitalizaron in patients with type 2 diabetes
admitted to the medical service. Endocr Pract
2016;22:1401–1405
17. Bansal V, Mottalib A, Pawar TK, et al.
Inpatient diabetes management by specialized
diabetes team versus primary service team in non-
critical care units: impact on 30-day readmission
rate and hospital cost. BMJ Open Diabetes Res
Care 2018;6:e000460
18. Ostling S, Wyckoff J, Ciarkowski SL, et al. The
relationship between diabetes mellitus and 30-
day readmission rates. Clin Diabetes Endocrinol
2017;3:3
19. Rushakoff RJ, Sullivan MM, MacMaster HW,
et al. Association between a virtual glucose
management service and glycemic control in
hospitalized adult patients: an observational study.
Ann Intern Med 2017;166:621–627
20. Magee MF, Baker KM, Bardsley JK, Wesley
D, Smith KM. Diabetes to go-inpatient: pragmatic
lessons learned from implementation of technology-
enabled diabetes survival skills education within
nursing unit workﬂow in an urban, tertiary care
hospital. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf 2021;47:
107–119
21. Pinkhasova D, Swami JB, Patel N, et al.
Patient understanding of discharge instructions
for home diabetes self-management and risk for
hospital readmission and emergency department
visits. Endocr Pract 2021;27:561–566
22. Society of Hospital Medicine. Glycemic
control for hospitalists. Accessed 21 August 2023.
Available
from
https://www.hospitalmedicine
.org/clinical-topics/glycemic-control/
23. Arnold P, Scheurer D, Dake AW, et al.
Hospital guidelines for diabetes management
and the Joint Commission-American Diabetes
Association Inpatient Diabetes Certiﬁcation. Am J
Med Sci 2016;351:333–341
24. Association of British Diabetologists. Joint
British Diabetes Societies (JBDS) for Inpatient
Care Group. Accessed 21 August 2023. Available
from https://abcd.care/jbds-ip
25. Agiostratidou G, Anhalt H, Ball D, et al.
Standardizing
clinically
meaningful
outcome
measures beyond HbA1c for type 1 diabetes: a
consensus report of the American Association of
Clinical Endocrinologists, the American Association
of Diabetes Educators, the American Diabetes
Association,the Endocrine Society, JDRF International,
The Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust,
the Pediatric Endocrine Society, and the T1D
Exchange. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1622–1630
26. Cardona S, Gomez PC, Vellanki P, et al.
Clinical
characteristics
and
outcomes
of
symptomatic and asymptomatic hypoglycemia
in hospitalized patients with diabetes. BMJ
Open Diabetes Res Care 2018;6:e000607
27. Van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers F,
et al. Intensive insulin therapy in critically ill
patients. N Engl J Med 2001;345:1359–1367
28. Finfer S, Chittock DR, Su SY, et al.; NICE-
SUGAR Study Investigators. Intensive versus
conventional glucose control in critically ill
patients. N Engl J Med 2009;360:1283–1297
29. Kansagara D, Fu R, Freeman M, Wolf F,
Helfand M. Intensive insulin therapy in hospitalized
patients: a systematic review. Ann Intern Med
2011;154:268–282
30. Sathya B, Davis R, Taveira T, Whitlatch H,Wu
WC. Intensity of peri-operative glycemic control
and postoperative outcomes in patients with
diabetes: a meta-analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract
2013;102:8–15
31. Umpierrez G, Cardona S, Pasquel F, et al.
Randomized controlled trial of intensive versus
conservative glucose control in patients undergoing
coronary artery bypass graft surgery: GLUCO-CABG
trial. Diabetes Care 2015;38:1665–1672
32. Furnary AP, Wu Y, Bookin SO. Effect of
hyperglycemia and continuous intravenous insulin
infusions on outcomes ofcardiac surgical procedures:
the Portland Diabetic Project. Endocr Pract 2004;
10(Suppl. 2):21–33
33. Magaji
V,
Nayak
S,
Donihi
AC,
et al.
Comparison of insulin infusion protocols targeting
110-140mg/dL in patients after cardiac surgery.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2012;14:1013–1017
34. Flory JH, Aleman JO, Furst J, Seley JJ. Basal
insulin use in the non-critical care setting: is
fasting hypoglycemia inevitable or preventable? J
Diabetes Sci Technol 2014;8:427–428
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diabetes Care in the Hospital
S303
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

35. Sacks DB, Arnold M, Bakris GL, et al.
Guidelines and recommendations for laboratory
analysis in the diagnosis and management of
diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care 2023;46:e151–
e199
36. DuBois JA, Slingerland RJ, Fokkert M, et al.
Bedside glucose monitoring-is it safe? A new,
regulatory-compliant risk assessment evaluation
protocol in critically ill patient care settings. Crit
Care Med 2017;45:567–574
37. Zhang R, Isakow W, Kollef MH, Scott MG.
Performance of a modern glucose meter in ICU
and general hospital inpatients: 3 years of real-
world paired meter and central laboratory results.
Crit Care Med 2017;45:1509–1514
38. Misra S, Avari P, Lumb A, et al. How can
point-of-care technologies support in-hospital
diabetes care? J Diabetes Sci Technol 2023;17:
509–516
39. Fortmann AL, Spierling Bagsic SR, Talavera L,
et al. Glucose as the ﬁfth vital sign: a randomized
controlled trial of continuous glucose monitoring
in a non-ICU hospital setting. Diabetes Care
2020;43:2873–2877
40. Galindo RJ, Migdal AL, Davis GM, et al.
Comparison of the FreeStyle Libre Pro ﬂash
continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) system
and point-of-care capillary glucose testing in
hospitalized patients with type 2 diabetes treated
with basal-bolus insulin regimen. Diabetes Care
2020;43:2730–2735
41. Galindo RJ, Umpierrez GE, Rushakoff RJ,
et al. Continuous glucose monitors and automated
insulin dosing systems in the hospital consensus
guideline. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2020;14:1035–
1064
42. Singh LG, Satyarengga M, Marcano I, et al.
Reducing inpatient hypoglycemia in the general
wards using real-time continuous glucose
monitoring: the glucose telemetry system, a
randomized clinical trial. Diabetes Care 2020;43:
2736–2743
43. Spanakis EK, Urrutia A, Galindo RJ, et al.
Continuous glucose monitoring-guided insulin
administration in hospitalized patients with diabetes:
a randomized clinical trial. Diabetes Care 2022;45:
2369–2375
44. Wallia A, Prince G, Touma E, El Muayed M,
Seley JJ. Caring for hospitalized patients with
diabetes mellitus, hyperglycemia, and COVID-19:
bridging the remaining knowledge gaps. Curr
Diab Rep 2020;20:77
45. Galindo RJ, Aleppo G, Klonoff DC, et al.
Implementation of continuous glucose monitoring
in the hospital: emergent considerations for
remote glucose monitoring during the COVID-19
pandemic. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2020;14:822–832
46. Longo RR, Elias H, Khan M, Seley JJ. Use and
accuracy of inpatient CGM during the COVID-19
pandemic: an observational study of general
medicine and ICU patients. J Diabetes Sci Technol
2022;16:1136–1143
47. Davis GM, Spanakis EK, Migdal AL, et al.
Accuracy of Dexcom G6 continuous glucose
monitoring in non-critically ill hospitalized patients
with diabetes. Diabetes Care 2021;44:1641–1646
48. Baker M, Musselman ME, Rogers R, Hellman
R. Practical implementation of remote continuous
glucose monitoring in hospitalized patients with
diabetes. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2022;79:
452–458
49. Wright JJ, Williams AJ, Friedman SB, et al.
Accuracy of continuous glucose monitors for
inpatient diabetes management. J Diabetes Sci
Technol 2023;17:1252–1255
50. Bellido V, Freckman G, Perez A, Galindo RJ.
Accuracy and potential interferences of continuous
glucose monitoring sensors in the hospital. Endocr
Pract 29:919–927
51. Avari
P,
Lumb
A,
Flanagan
D,
et al.
Continuous glucose monitoring within hospital: a
scoping review and summary of guidelines from
the Joint British Diabetes Societies for Inpatient
Care. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2023;17:611–624
52. Braithwaite SS, Clark LP, Idrees T, Qureshi F,
Soetan OT. Hypoglycemia prevention by algorithm
design during intravenous insulin infusion. Curr
Diab Rep 2018;18:26
53. Dhatariya
KK,
Glaser
NS,
Codner
E,
Umpierrez GE. Diabetic ketoacidosis. Nat Rev
Dis Primers 2020;6:40
54. Anis TR, Bourdreau M,Thornton T. Comparing
the efﬁcacy of a nurse-driven and a physician-
driven diabetes ketoacidosis (DKA) treatment
protocol. Clin Pharmacol 2021;13:197–202
55. Rao P, Jiang SF, Kipnis P, Patel DM, Katsnelson S,
Madani S, Liu VX. Evaluation of outcomes following
hospital-wide implementation of a subcutaneous
insulin protocol for diabetic keotacidosis. JAMA
Netw Open 2022;5:e226417
56. Maynard G, Wesorick DH, O’Malley C;
Society of Hospital Medicine Glycemic Control
Task Force. Subcutaneous insulin order sets and
protocols: effective design and implementation
strategies. J Hosp Med 2008;3(Suppl.):29–41
57. Brown KE, Hertig JB. Determining current
insulin pen use practices and errors in the
inpatient setting. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf
2016;42:568–575, AP1–AP7
58. Horne J, Bond R, Sarangarm P. Comparison
of inpatient glycemic control with insulin vials
versus insulin pens in general medicine patients.
Hosp Pharm 2015;50:514–521
59. Veronesi G, Poerio CS, Braus A, et al.
Determinants of nurse satisfaction using insulin
pen devices with safety needles: an exploratory
factor analysis. Clin Diabetes Endocrinol 2015;1:15
60. Institute for Safe Medication Practices. ISMP
Guidelines for Optimizing Safe Subcutaneous
Insulin Use in Adults. 2017. Accessed 21 August
2023. Available from https://www.ismp.org/sites/
default/ﬁles/attachments/2018-09/ISMP138D
-Insulin%20Guideline-090718.pdf
61. Najmi U, Haque WZ, Ansari U, et al.
Inpatient insulin pen implementation, waste, and
potential cost savings: a community hospital
experience. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2021;15:741–747
62. Bueno E, Benitez A, Ruﬁnelli JV, et al. Basal-
bolus regimen with insulin analogues versus
human insulin in medical patients with type 2
diabetes: a randomized controlled trial in Latin
America. Endocr Pract 2015;21:807–813
63. Umpierrez GE, Smiley D, Jacobs S, et al.
Randomized study of basal-bolus insulin therapy
in the inpatient management of patients with
type 2 diabetes undergoing general surgery (RABBIT
2 surgery). Diabetes Care 2011;34:256–261
64. Colunga-Lozano LE, Gonzalez Torres FJ,
Delgado-Figueroa N, et al. Sliding scale insulin for
non-critically ill hospitalised adults with diabetes
mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2018;11:
CD011296
65. Migdal AL, Fortin-Leung C, Pasquel F, Wang
H, Peng L, Umpierrez GE. Inpatient glycemic
control with sliding scale insulin in noncritical
patients with type 2 diabetes: who can slide? J
Hosp Med 2021;16:462–468
66. Bellido V, Suarez L, Rodriguez MG, et al.
Comparison of basal-bolus and premixed insulin
regimens in hospitalized patients with type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2015;38:2211–2216
67. Galindo RJ, Pasquel FJ, Vellanki P, et al.
Degludec hospital trial: a randomized controlled
trial comparing insulin degludec U100 and glargine
U100 for the inpatient management of patients
with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Obes Metab 2022;
24:42–49
68. Pasquel FJ, Lansang MC, Khowaja A, et al. A
randomized controlled trial comparing glargine
U300 and glargine U100 for the inpatient
management of medicine and surgery patients
with type 2 diabetes: glargine U300 hospital trial.
Diabetes Care 2020;43:1242–1248
69. Perez A, Carrasco-Sanchez FJ, Gonzalez C, et al.
Efﬁcacy and safety of insulin glargine 300 U/mL
(Gla-300) during hospitalization and therapy
intensiﬁcation at discharge in patients with
insufﬁciently controlled type 2 diabetes: results of
the phase IV COBALTA trial. BMJ Open Diabetes
Res Care 2020;8:e001518
70. Baldwin D, Zander J, Munoz C, et al. A
randomized trial of two weight-based doses of
insulin glargine and glulisine in hospitalized subjects
with type 2 diabetes and renal insufﬁciency.
Diabetes Care 2012;35:1970–1974
71. Iyengar R, Franzese J, Gianchandani R.
Inpatient glycemic management in the setting of
renal insufﬁciency/failure/dialysis. Curr Diab Rep
2018;18:75
72. Shomali ME, Herr DL, Hill PC, Pehlivanova M,
Sharretts JM, Magee MF. Conversion from
intravenous insulin to subcutaneous insulin after
cardiovascular surgery: transition to target study.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2011;13:121–126
73. Kreider KE, Lien LF. Transitioning safely from
intravenous to subcutaneous insulin. Curr Diab
Rep 2015;15:23
74. Thammakosol K, Sriphrapradang C. Effectiveness
and safety of early insulin glargine administration in
combination with continuous intravenous insulin
infusion in the management of diabetic ketoacidosis:
a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Obes Metab
2023;25:815–822
75. Hsia E, Seggelke S, Gibbs J, et al. Subcutaneous
administration of glargine to diabetic patients
receiving insulin infusion prevents rebound
hyperglycemia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2012;97:
3132–3137
76. Lim Y, Ohn JH, Jeong J, et al. Effect of the
concomitant use of subcutaneous basal insulin
and intravenous insulin infusion in the treatment
of severe hyperglycemic patients. Endocrinol
Metab (Seoul) 2022;37:444–454
77. Tripathy PR, Lansang MC. U-500 regular
insulin use in hospitalized patients. Endocr Pract
2015;21:54–58
78. Lansang MC, Umpierrez GE. Inpatient hyper-
glycemia management: a practical review for
primary medical and surgical teams. Cleve Clin J
Med 2016;83(Suppl. 1):S34–S43
79. Galindo RJ, Dhatariya K, Gomez-Peralta F,
Umpierrez GE. Safety and efﬁcacy of inpatient
diabetes management with non-insulin agents:
S304
Diabetes Care in the Hospital
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

an overview of international practices. Curr Diab
Rep 2022;22:237–246
80. Pasquel
FJ,
Lansang
MC,
Dhatariya
K,
Umpierrez GE. Management of diabetes and
hyperglycaemia in the hospital. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol 2021;9:174–188
81. Umpierrez GE, Gianchandani R, Smiley D,
et al. Safety and efﬁcacy of sitagliptin therapy for
the inpatient management of general medicine
and surgery patients with type 2 diabetes: a pilot,
randomized, controlled studyDiabetes Care 2013;
36:3430–3435
82. Fushimi N, Shibuya T, Yoshida Y, Ito S,
Hachiya H, Mori A. Dulaglutide-combined basal
plus correction insulin therapy contributes to
ideal glycemic control in non-critical hospitalized
patients. J Diabetes Investig 2020;11:125–131
83. Fayfman M, Galindo RJ, Rubin DJ, et al. A
randomized controlled trial on the safety and
efﬁcacy of exenatide therapy for the inpatient
management of general medicine and surgery
patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care
2019;42:450–456
84. Perez-Belmonte
LM,
Osuna-Sanchez
J,
Millan-Gomez M, et al. Glycaemic efﬁcacy and
safety of linagliptin for the management of non-
cardiac surgery patients with type 2 diabetes in a
real-world setting: Lina-Surg study. Ann Med
2019;51:252–261
85. Vellanki P, Rasouli N, Baldwin D, et al.;
Linagliptin Inpatient Research Group. Glycaemic
efﬁcacy and safety of linagliptin compared to a
basal-bolus insulin regimen in patients with type 2
diabetes
undergoing
non-cardiac
surgery:
a
multicentre randomized clinical trial. Diabetes
Obes Metab 2019;21:837–843
86. Pasquel FJ, Gianchandani R, Rubin DJ, et al.
Efﬁcacy of sitagliptin for the hospital management
of general medicine and surgery patients with
type 2 diabetes (Sita-Hospital): a multicentre,
prospective, open-label, non-inferiority randomised
trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;5:125–133
87. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA
Drug Safety Communication: FDA adds warnings
about heart failure risk to labels of type 2
diabetes medicines containing saxagliptin and
alogliptin. Accessed 21 August 2023. Available
from
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/
ucm486096.htm
88. Kosiborod MN, Angermann CE, Collins S,
et al. Effects of empagliﬂozin on symptoms,
physical limitations, and quality of life in patients
hospitalized for acute heart failure: results from
the EMPULSE trial. Circulation 2022;146:279–288
89. Tamaki S, Yamada T,
Watanabe T, et al.
Effect of empagliﬂozin as an add-on therapy on
decongestion and renal function in patients with
diabetes hospitalized for acute decompensated
heart failure: a prospective randomized controlled
study [published correction appears in Circ Heart
Fail 2021;14:e000067]. Circ Heart Fail 2021;14:
e007048
90. Cunningham JW, Vaduganathan M, Claggett
BL, et al. Dapagliﬂozin in patients recently
hospitalized with heart failure and mildly reduced
or preserved ejection fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol
2022;80:1302–1310
91. Salah HM, Al’Aref SJ, Khan MS, et al. Efﬁcacy
and safety of sodium-glucose cotransporter 2
inhibitors initiation in patients with acute heart
failure, with and without type 2 diabetes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Cardiovasc
Diabetol 2022;21:20
92. Voors AA, Angermann CE, Teerlink JR, et al.
The SGLT2 inhibitor empagliﬂozin in patients
hospitalized for acute heart failure: a multinational
randomized trial. Nat Med 2022;28:568–574
93. Jhund PS, Ponikowski P, Docherty KF, et al.
Dapagliﬂozin and recurrent heart failure
hospitalizations in heart failure with reduced
ejection fraction: an analysis of DAPA-HF.
Circulation 2021;143:1962–1972
94. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA
revises labels of SGLT2 inhibitors for diabetes to
include warnings about too much acid in the
blood and serious urinary tract infections.
Accessed 21 August 2023. Available from https://
www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/
fda-revises-labels-sglt2-inhibitors-diabetes-include
-warnings-about-too-much-acid-blood-and-serious
95. Lake A, Arthur A, Byrne C, Davenport K,
Yamamoto JM, Murphy HR. The effect of
hypoglycaemia during hospital admission on health-
related outcomes for people with diabetes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabet Med
2019;36:1349–1359
96. Garg R, Hurwitz S, Turchin A, Trivedi A.
Hypoglycemia, with or without insulin therapy, is
associated
with
increased
mortality
among
hospitalized patients. Diabetes Care 2013;36:
1107–1110
97. Ilcewicz HN, Hennessey EK, Smith CB.
Evaluation of the impact of an inpatient
hyperglycemia protocol on glycemic control. J
Pharm Pharm Sci 2019;22:85–92
98. Sinha Gregory N, Seley JJ, Gerber LM, Tang
C, Brillon D. Decreased rates of hypoglycemia
following implementation of a comprehensive
computerized insulin order set and titration
algorithm in the inpatient setting. Hosp Pract
(1995) 2016;44:260–265
99. Moghissi ES, Korytkowski MT, DiNardo M,
et al. American Association of Clinical Endocrino-
logists; American Diabetes Association. American
Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and
American
Diabetes
Association
consensus
statement on inpatient glycemic control. Diabetes
Care 2009;32:1119–1131
100. Akirov A, Grossman A, Shochat T, Shimon I.
Mortality
among
hospitalized
patients
with
hypoglycemia: insulin related and noninsulin
related. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2017;102:416–
424
101. Amori RE, Pittas AG, Siegel RD, et al.
Inpatient medical errors involving glucose-lowering
medications and their impact on patients: review of
2,598 incidents from a voluntary electronic error-
reporting
database.
Endocr
Pract
2008;14:
535–542
102. Alwan D, Chipps E, Yen PY, Dungan K.
Evaluation of the timing and coordination of
prandial insulin administration in the hospital.
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2017;131:18–32
103. Korytkowski M, Dinardo M, Donihi AC, Bigi
L, Devita M. Evolution of a diabetes inpatient
safety committee. Endocr Pract 2006;12(Suppl.
3):91–99
104. Hung AM, Siew ED,Wilson OD, et al. Risk of
hypoglycemia following hospital discharge in
patients with diabetes and acute kidney injury.
Diabetes Care 2018;41:503–512
105. Maynard G, Kulasa K, Ramos P, et al.
Impact of a hypoglycemia reduction bundle and a
systems approach to inpatient glycemic management.
EndocrPract2015;21:355–367
106. Milligan PE, Bocox MC, Pratt E, Hoehner
CM, Krettek JE, Dunagan WC. Multifaceted approach
to reducing occurrence of severe hypoglycemia in a
large healthcare system. Am J Health Syst Pharm
2015;72:1631–1641
107. Umpierrez G, Korytkowski M. Diabetic
emergencies - ketoacidosis, hyperglycaemic
hyperosmolar state and hypoglycaemia. Nat
Rev Endocrinol 2016;12:222–232
108. Dagogo-Jack S. Hypoglycemia in type 1
diabetes mellitus: pathophysiology and prevention.
Treat Endocrinol 2004;3:91–103
109. Rickels MR. Hypoglycemia-associated auto-
nomic failure, counterregulatory responses, and
therapeutic options in type 1 diabetes. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 2019;1454:68–79
110. Dendy JA, Chockalingam V, Tirumalasetty
NN, et al. Identifying risk factors for severe
hypoglycemia in hospitalized patients with diabetes.
Endocr Pract 2014;20:1051–1056
111. Ulmer BJ, Kara A, Mariash CN. Temporal
occurrences and recurrence patterns of hypoglycemia
during hospitalization. Endocr Pract 2015;21:501–507
112. Shah BR,Walji S, Kiss A, James JE, Lowe JM.
Derivation and validation of a risk-prediction tool
for hypoglycemia in hospitalized adults with
diabetes: the Hypoglycemia During Hospitalization
(HyDHo) score. Can J Diabetes 2019;43:278–
282.e1
113. Mathioudakis NN, Everett E, Routh S, et al.
Development and validation of a prediction model
for insulin-associated hypoglycemia in non-critically
ill hospitalized adults. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care
2018;6:e000499
114. Curll
M,
Dinardo
M,
Noschese
M,
Korytkowski MT. Menu selection, glycaemic
control and satisfaction with standard and patient-
controlled consistent carbohydrate meal plans in
hospitalised patients with diabetes. Qual Saf Health
Care 2010;19:355–359
115. Drincic AT, Knezevich JT, Akkireddy P.
Nutrition and hyperglycemia management in the
inpatient setting (meals on demand, parenteral,
or enteral nutrition). Curr Diab Rep 2017;17:59
116. Korytkowski M, Draznin B, Drincic A. Food,
fasting, insulin, and glycemic control in the
hospital. In Managing Diabetes and Hyperglycemia
in the Hospital Setting. Draznin B, Ed. Alexandria,
VA, American Diabetes Association, 2016, p. 70–83
117. Mabrey ME, Setji TL. Patient self-management
of diabetes care in the inpatient setting: pro. J
DiabetesSci Technol 2015;9:1152–1154
118. Shah
AD,
Rushakoff
RJ.
Patient
self-
management of diabetes care in the inpatient
setting: con. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2015;9:1155–
1157
119. Flanagan D, Dhatariya K; Joint British
Diabetes Societies (JBDS) for Inpatient Care group
and Guidelines writing group. Self-management
of diabetes in hospital: a guideline from the Joint
British Diabetes Societies (JBDS) for Inpatient
Care group. Diabet Med 2018;35:992–996
120. Umpierrez GE, Klonoff DC. Diabetes technology
update: use of insulin pumps and continuous glucose
monitoring in the hospital. Diabetes Care 2018;41:
1579–1589
121. Houlden RL, Moore S. In-hospital management
of adults using insulin pump therapy. Can J Diabetes
2014;38:126–133
diabetesjournals.org/care
Diabetes Care in the Hospital
S305
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

122. Korytkowski MT, Salata RJ, Koerbel GL,
et al. Insulin therapy and glycemic control in
hospitalized patients with diabetes during enteral
nutrition therapy: a randomized controlled clinical
trial. Diabetes Care 2009;32:594–596
123. Hsia E, Seggelke SA, Gibbs J, Rasouli N,
Draznin B. Comparison of 70/30 biphasic insulin
with glargine/lispro regimen in non-critically ill
diabetic patients on continuous enteral nutrition
therapy. Nutr Clin Pract 2011;26:714–717
124. Olveira G, Abuın J, Lopez R, et al. Regular
insulin added to total parenteral nutrition vs
subcutaneous glargine in non-critically ill diabetic
inpatients, a multicenter randomized clinical trial:
INSUPAR trial. Clin Nutr 2020;39:388–394
125. Pichardo-Lowden AR, Fan CY, Gabbay RA.
Management of hyperglycemia in the non-
intensive care patient: featuring subcutaneous
insulin protocols. Endocr Pract 2011;17:249–260
126. Donihi AC, Raval D, Saul M, Korytkowski
MT, DeVita MA. Prevalence and predictors of
corticosteroid-related hyperglycemia in hospitalized
patients. Endocr Pract 2006;12:358–362
127. Narwani V, Swafe L, Stavraka C, Dhatariya
K. How frequently are bedside glucose levels
measured in hospital inpatients on glucocorticoid
treatment? Clin Med (Lond) 2014;14:327–328
128. Roberts A, James J; Joint British Diabetes
Societies (JBDS) for Inpatient Care. Management
of hyperglycaemia and steroid (glucocorticoid)
therapy: a guideline from the Joint British Diabetes
Societies (JBDS) for Inpatient Care group. Diabet
Med 2018;35:1011–1017
129. Kwon
S,
Hermayer
KL,
Hermayer
K.
Glucocorticoid-induced hyperglycemia. Am J Med
Sci 2013;345:274–277
130. Seggelke SA, Gibbs J, Draznin B. Pilot study
of using neutral protamine Hagedorn insulin to
counteract the effect of methylprednisolone in
hospitalized patients with diabetes. J Hosp Med
2011;6:175–176
131. Brady V, Thosani S, Zhou S, Bassett R,
Busaidy NL, Lavis V. Safe and effective dosing of
basal-bolus insulin in patients receiving high-dose
steroids for hyper-cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,
vincristine, and dexamethasone chemotherapy.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2014;16:874–879
132. Cheng YC, Guerra Y, Morkos M, et al.
Insulin management in hospitalized patients with
diabetes mellitus on high-dose glucocorticoids:
management of steroid-exacerbated hyperglycemia.
PLoS One 2021;16:e0256682
133. Bajaj MA, Zale AD, Morgenlander WR,
Abusamaan MS, Mathioudakis N. Insulin dosing
and glycemic outcomes among steroid-treated
hospitalized patients. Endocr Pract 2022;28:774–779
134. Gianchandani R, Dubois E, Alexanian S,
Rushakoff R. Preoperative, intraoperative, and
postoperative glucose management. In Managing
Diabetes and Hyperglycemia in the Hospital
Setting. Drasnin B, Ed. Alexandria, VA, American
Diabetes Association, 2016, p. 129–144
135. Duggan EW, Carlson K, Umpierrez GE.
Perioperative hyperglycemia management: an
update. Anesthesiology 2017;126:547–560
136. Todd LA, Vigersky RA. Evaluating peri-
operative
glycemic
control
of
non-cardiac
surgical patients with diabetes. Mil Med 2021;
186:e867–e872
137. Bellon F, Sola I, Gimenez-Perez G, et al.
Perioperative glycaemic control for people with
diabetes undergoing surgery. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2023;8:CD007315
138. Perez-Guzman MC, Duggan E, Gibanica S,
et al. Continuous glucose monitoring in the
operating room and cardiac intensive care unit.
Diabetes Care 2021;44:e50–e52
139. Demma
LJ,
Carlson
KT,
Duggan
EW,
Morrow JG 3rd, Umpierrez G. Effect of basal
insulin dosage on blood glucose concentration in
ambulatory surgery patients with type 2 diabetes.
J Clin Anesth 2017;36:184–188
140. Harrison VS, Rustico S, Palladino AA,
Ferrara C, Hawkes CP. Glargine co-administration
with intravenous insulin in pediatric diabetic
ketoacidosis is safe and facilitates transition to a
subcutaneous regimen. Pediatr Diabetes 2017;
18:742–748
141. Kitabchi AE, Umpierrez GE, Miles JM, Fisher
JN. Hyperglycemic crises in adult patients with
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2009;32:1335–1343
142. Vellanki P, Umpierrez GE. Diabetic ketoacidosis:
a common debut of diabetes among African
Americans with type 2 diabetes. Endocr Pract
2017;23:971–978
143. Andrade-Castellanos CA, Colunga-Lozano
LE, Delgado-Figueroa N, Gonzalez-Padilla DA.
Subcutaneous rapid-acting insulin analogues for
diabetic ketoacidosis. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2016;2016:CD011281
144. Kitabchi AE, Umpierrez GE, Fisher JN,
Murphy MB, Stentz FB. Thirty years of personal
experience in hyperglycemic crises: diabetic
ketoacidosis and hyperglycemic hyperosmolar
state. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008;93:1541–1552
145. Karajgikar ND, Manroa P, Acharya R, et al.
Addressing pitfalls in management of diabetic
ketoacidosis with a standardized protocol. Endocr
Pract 2019;25:407–412
146. Moghissi E, Inzucchi S. The evolution of
glycemic control in the hospital setting. In
Managing Diabetes and Hyperglycemia in the
Hospital Setting. Draznin B, Ed. Alexandria, VA,
American Diabetes Association, 2016, pp. 1–10
147. Shepperd S, Lannin NA, Clemson LM,
McCluskey A, Cameron ID, Barras SL. Discharge
planning from hospital to home. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2013;1:CD000313
148. Gregory NS, Seley JJ, Dargar SK, Galla N,
Gerber
LM,
Lee
JI.
Strategies
to
prevent
readmission in high-risk patients with diabetes:
the importance of an interdisciplinary approach.
Curr Diab Rep 2018;18:54
149. Rubin
DJ,
Shah
AA.
Predicting
and
preventing acute care re-utilization by patients
with diabetes. Curr Diab Rep 2021;21:34
150. Rinaldi A, Snider M, James A, et al. The
impact of a diabetes transitions of care clinic on
hospital utilization and patientcare. Ann Pharmacother
2023;57:127–132
151. Patel N, Swami J, Pinkhasova D, et al. Sex
differences in glycemic measures, complications,
discharge disposition, and postdischarge emergency
room visits and readmission among non-critically ill,
hospitalized patients with diabetes. BMJ Open
Diabetes Res Care 2022;10:e002722
152. Agency
for
Healthcare
Research
and
Quality. Patient Safety Network – Readmissions
and adverse events
after discharge,
2019.
Accessed 22 August 2023. Available from https://
psnet.ahrq.gov/primer.aspx?primerID=11
153. Rubin DJ. Hospital readmission of patients
with diabetes. Curr Diab Rep 2015;15:17
154. Jiang HJ, Stryer D, Friedman B, Andrews R.
Multiple
hospitalizations
for
patients
with
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2003;26:1421–1426
155. Maldonado MR, D’Amico S, Rodriguez L,
Iyer D, Balasubramanyam A. Improved outcomes
in indigent patients with ketosis-prone diabetes:
effect of a dedicated diabetes treatment unit.
Endocr Pract 2003;9:26–32
156. Wu EQ, Zhou S, Yu A, et al. Outcomes
associated with post-discharge insulin continuity
in US patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
initiating insulin in the hospital. Hosp Pract
(1995) 2012;40:40–48
157. Hirschman KB, Bixby MB. Transitions in
care from the hospital to home for patients
with diabetes. Diabetes Spectr 2014;27:192–
195
158. de Boer IH, Khunti K, Sadusky T, et al.
Diabetes management in chronic kidney disease:
a consensus report by the American Diabetes
Association (ADA) and Kidney Disease: Improving
Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Diabetes Care 2022;45:
3075–3090
S306
Diabetes Care in the Hospital
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

17. Diabetes Advocacy: Standards
of Care in Diabetes—2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S307–S308 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-S017
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes
the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the
components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to
evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee, an
interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of
Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA
standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s
clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee
members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to com-
ment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
Managing the daily health demands of diabetes can be challenging. People living
with diabetes should not have to face discrimination due to diabetes. By advocating
for the rights of those with diabetes at all levels, the American Diabetes Association
(ADA) can help to ensure that they live a healthy and productive life. A strategic goal
of the ADA is for more children and adults with diabetes to live free from the burden
of discrimination.The ADA is also focused on making sure cost is not a barrier to suc-
cessful diabetes management.
One tactic for achieving these goals has been to implement the ADA Standards of
Care through advocacy-oriented position statements. The ADA publishes evidence-
based, peer-reviewed statements on topics such as diabetes and employment, diabe-
tes and driving, insulin access and affordability, and diabetes management in certain
settings such as schools, childcare programs, and detention facilities. In addition to the
ADA’s clinical documents, these advocacy statements are important tools in educating
schools, employers, licensing agencies, policy makers, and others about the intersec-
tion of diabetes management and the law and for providing scientiﬁcally supported
policy recommendations.
ADVOCACY STATEMENTS
The following is a partial list of advocacy statements ordered by publication date, with
the most recent statement appearing ﬁrst. A comprehensive list of advocacy state-
ments is available at professional.diabetes.org/content/key-statements-and-reports.
Care of Young Children With Diabetes in the Childcare and Community
Setting
Very young children (aged <5 years) with diabetes have legal protections and can be
safely cared for by childcare professionals with appropriate training, access to resour-
ces, and a communication system with parents/guardians and the child’s diabetes
health care professional. Refer to the published ADA advocacy statement for infor-
mation on young children aged <5 years in settings such as childcare centers, pre-
schools, camps, and other programs (1).
*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional
Practice
Committee.
17.
Diabetes
advocacy: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2024.
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S307–S308
© 2023 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
17. DIABETES ADVOCACY
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
S307
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Insulin Access and Affordability
The ADA’s Insulin Access and Afford-
ability Working Group compiled public
information and convened a series of
meetings with stakeholders through-
out the insulin supply chain to learn
how each entity affects the cost of insulin
for the consumer. Their conclusions and
recommendations are published in an
ADA statement (2).
Diabetes Care in the School Setting
A sizable portion of a child’s day is spent
in school, so close communication with
and training and cooperation of school
personnel are essential to optimize diabe-
tes management, safety, and access to all
school-sponsored opportunities. Refer to
the published ADA position statement for
diabetes management information for
students with diabetes in elementary
and secondary school settings (3).
Diabetes and Driving
People with diabetes who wish to oper-
ate motor vehicles are subject to various
licensing requirements applied by both
state and federal jurisdictions. For an
overview of existing licensing rules for
people with diabetes, factors that impact
driving for this population, and general
guidelines for assessing driver ﬁtness and
determining appropriate licensing restric-
tions, refer to the published ADA position
statement (4).
Editor’s note: Federal commercial driv-
ing rules for individuals with insulin-treated
diabetes changed on 19 November 2018.
These changes will be reﬂected in a future
updated ADA statement.
Diabetes and Employment
Any person with diabetes, whether insu-
lin treated or noninsulin treated, should
be eligible for any employment for which
they are otherwise qualiﬁed. Employ-
ment decisions should never be based on
generalizations or stereotypes regarding
the effects of diabetes. For a general set
of guidelines for evaluating individuals
with diabetes for employment, including
how an assessment should be performed
and what changes (accommodations) in
the workplace may be needed for an indi-
vidual with diabetes, refer to the pub-
lished ADA position statement (5).
References
1. March C, Serman J, Bannuru RR, et al. Care of
young children with diabetes in the childcare
and community setting: a statement of the
American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care
2023;46:2102–2111
2. Cefalu WT, Dawes DE, Gavlak G, et al.; Insulin
Access and Affordability Working Group. Insulin
Access and Affordability Working Group: conclusions
and recommendations [published correction appears
in Diabetes Care 2018;41:1831]. Diabetes Care
2018;41:1299–1311
3. Jackson CC, Albanese-O’Neill A, Butler KL,
et al. Diabetes care in the school setting: a
position statement of the American Diabetes
Association. Diabetes Care 2015;38:1958–1963
4. Lorber D, Anderson J, Arent S, et al.; American
Diabetes Association. Diabetes and driving. Diabetes
Care 2014;37(Suppl. 1):S97–S103
5. Anderson JE, Greene MA, Grifﬁn JW Jr, et al.;
American Diabetes Association. Diabetes and
employment. Diabetes Care 2014;37(Suppl. 1):
S112–S117
S308
Diabetes Advocacy
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Disclosures: Standards of Care in
Diabetes—2024
Diabetes Care 2024;47(Suppl. 1):S309–S313 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc24-SDIS
Committee members disclosed the following ﬁnancial or other dualities of interest covering the period 12 months before
December 2023
Member
Employment
Research
grant
Other
research
support
Speakers
bureau/
honoraria
Ownership
interest
Consultant/
advisory board
Other
American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
Nuha A. ElSayed
(Chair)§
American Diabetes
Association;
Harvard Medical
School
None
None
None
None
None
Endocrinologist, Joslin
Diabetes Center;
Chair, Diabetes Education
for All
Grazia Aleppo
Northwestern
University Feinberg
School of Medicine
Division of
Endocrinology,
Metabolism and
Molecular Medicine
Fractyl,# Insulet,#
MannKind,# Tandem
Diabetes Care,#
Welldoc#
None
None
None
Dexcom,* Insulet,
Medscape
None
Raveendhara R.
Bannuru (Chief
Methodologist)§
American Diabetes
Association
None
None
None
None
None
None
Dennis Bruemmer
Cleveland Clinic Lerner
College of Medicine,
Case Western Reserve
University
Novartis
None
None
None
Bayer,* Esperion*
None
Billy S. Collins
Indian Health Service,
Department of Health
and Human Services
None
None
None
None
None
None
Laya Ekhlaspour
Division of
Endocrinology,
Department of
Pediatrics,
University of
California, San
Francisco
Abbott,*# Beta
Bionics,*# Insulet,*#
MannKind,*#
Medtronic,*# Tandem
Diabetes Care*#
Insulet,* MannKind
American Diabetes
Association
(honoraria), Icahn
School of Medicine
at Sinai (honoraria),
Insulet,* Medtronic
(speakers bureau)
None
Diabetes Center
Bern, Ypsomed,
Tandem Diabetes
Care
Diabetes Technology
Interest Group
(Membership Advisory
Group Liaison); market
research for health care
professionals: online
surveys
Marisa E. Hilliard
Baylor College of
Medicine Texas
Children’s Hospital
None
None
DiabetesMine
(honoraria)
None
None
Springer Publishing (book
royalties); American
Diabetes Association
(book royalties)
Eric L. Johnson
University of North
Dakota School of
Medicine and Health
Sciences; Altru Health
System
National Science
Foundation#
None
American Diabetes
Association
(honoraria)
None
None
Member, North Dakota
Leadership Board;
Volunteer, Tobacco Free
North Dakota
Continued on p. S310
DISCLOSURES
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
S309
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Member
Employment
Research
grant
Other
research
support
Speakers
bureau/
honoraria
Ownership
interest
Consultant/
advisory board
Other
Kamlesh Khunti
University of
Leicester;
Leicester Diabetes
Centre; Leicester
General Hospital
AstraZeneca,*#
Boehringer
Ingelheim,*# Eli Lilly,*#
Merck Sharp &
Dohme,*# Novartis,*#
Novo Nordisk,*#
Sanoﬁ*#
None
Amgen,
AstraZeneca,* Bayer,
Berlin-Chemie AG/
Menarini Group,
Boehringer
Ingelheim,* Eli Lilly,*
Merck Sharp &
Dohme, Napp
Pharmaceuticals,
Novartis, Novo
Nordisk,* Roche,
Sanoﬁ, Servier*
None
Amgen, AstraZeneca,*
Bayer, Berlin-Chemie
AG/Menarini Group,
Boehringer Ingelheim,*
Eli Lilly,* Merck Sharp
& Dohme, Napp
Pharmaceuticals,
Novartis, Novo
Nordisk,* Roche,
Sanoﬁ, Servier*
None
Ildiko Lingvay
Department of
Internal Medicine/
Division of
Endocrinology,
Peter O’Donnell Jr.
School of Public
Health, University
of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center
Boehringer
Ingelheim,*# Novo
Nordisk,*# Sanoﬁ*#
None
Boehringer
Ingelheim,* Eli Lilly,*
Johnson &
Johnson,* Novo
Nordisk,* Sanoﬁ,*
Zealand Pharma*
None
Altimmune, Biomea
Fusion, Boehringer
Ingelheim,* Carmot
Therapeutics, Eli Lilly,*
Johnson & Johnson,*
Merck, Metsera
Therapeutics, Novo
Nordisk,* Pﬁzer,
Sanoﬁ,* Shionogi,
Structure
Therapeutics, Terns
Pharmaceuticals,
Zealand Pharma*
None
Glenn Matﬁn
National Health
Service
None
None
None
None
None
None
Rozalina G. McCoy
Division of
Endocrinology,
Diabetes, and
Nutrition, University
of Maryland
School of Medicine;
University of
Maryland Institute
for Health
Computing
American Diabetes
Association*
None
American Diabetes
Association
(honoraria)
None
None
None
Mary Lou Perry
University of Virginia
Heart and Vascular
Center/Morrison’s
Healthcare
None
None
LifeScan Diabetes
Institute
None
Embecta
None
Scott J. Pilla
Division of General
Internal Medicine,
Department of
Medicine, Johns
Hopkins University
School of Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
Sarit Polsky
Barbara Davis Center
for Diabetes and
University of
Colorado, Anschutz
Medical Campus
JDRF,* The Leona H.
and Harry B. Helmsley
Charitable Trust,*
Dexcom*#
None
None
None
None
Pregnancy Subcommittee
Member, American
Diabetes Association
84th Scientiﬁc Sessions;
American College of
Diabetology (board
member)
Priya Prahalad
Stanford University
None
None
None
None
None
Member of the Epic
Pediatric Endocrinology
Steering Board
Continued on p. S311
S310
Disclosures
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Member
Employment
Research
grant
Other
research
support
Speakers
bureau/
honoraria
Ownership
interest
Consultant/
advisory board
Other
Richard E. Pratley
Advent Health
Translational
Research Institute
Dompe,# Novo
Nordisk,# Rivus
Pharmaceuticals#
None
Novo Nordisk#
None
Bayer,# Cortcept
Pharmaceuticals,# Eli
Lilly,# Endogenex,#
Gasherbrum Bio,# Intas
Pharmaceuticals,#
Novo Nordisk,#
Pﬁzer,# Rivus
Pharmaceuticals,#
Sun Pharmaceutical
Industries#
None
Alissa R. Segal
Massachusetts College
of Pharmacy &
Health Sciences;
Brigham and
Women’s Hospital
None
None
MannKind
None
None
Diabetes Education for All
(volunteer board
member); Diabetes
Spectrum, Editorial
Board Member
Jane Jeffrie Seley
Weill Cornell Medicine None
None
LifeScan Diabetes
Institute
None
None
Director of Strategy,
Diabetes Technology
Society;
Associate Editor,
Diabetes Spectrum;
Editor, Current Diabetes
Reports;
Editor, BMJ Open
Diabetes Research &
Care; Member, ADA
Scientiﬁc Sessions
Planning Committee;
Member, ADA Clinical
Update Planning
Committee
Robert C. Stanton
Joslin Diabetes
Center, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical
Center, Harvard
Medical School
None
None
None
None
None
None
Robert A. Gabbay§
American Diabetes
Association;
Harvard Medical
School
None
None
None
None
HealthReveal, Lark
Technologies,
Onduo,* StartUp
Health, Sweetech,
Vida Health*
Joslin Diabetes Center
American College of Cardiology Designated Representatives and Staff (Section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management”)
Sandeep R. Das
University of Texas
Southwestern
Medical Center
None
None
None
None
None
American Heart
Association (President
of the Dallas Board)
Mikhail N.
Kosiborod
Saint Luke’s Mid
America Heart
Institute;
University of
Missouri–Kansas City
School of Medicine
American College of
Cardiology
Foundation,*#
AstraZeneca,*#
Boehringer
Ingelheim,*# CPC
Clinical Research,*#
Novo Nordisk,*#
University of
Pittsburgh*#
None
Amgen,*# Astra
Zeneca,*# Bayer,*#
Boehringer
Ingelheim,*#
Medcon
International, Novo
Nordisk,*# The
Metabolic Institute
of America, Vifor
Pharma,*# Vox
Media
Artera, Saghmos
Therapeutics
35Pharma, Alnylam
Pharmaceuticals,#
Amgen,*# Applied
Therapeutics,#
AstraZeneca,*#
Bayer,*# Boehringer
Ingelheim,*#
Cytokinetics,#
Dexcom,# Eli Lilly,#
Esperion
Therapeutics,# Imbria
Pharmaceuticals,#
Senior volunteer, American
Heart Association
Continued on p. S312
diabetesjournals.org/care
Disclosures
S311
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Member
Employment
Research
grant
Other
research
support
Speakers
bureau/
honoraria
Ownership
interest
Consultant/
advisory board
Other
Janssen
Pharmaceuticals,#
Lexicon
Pharmaceuticals,#
Medscape, Medcon
International, Merck,#
Novo Nordisk,*#
Pharmacosmos,#
Pﬁzer,*# Radcliffe
Cardiology, Sanoﬁ,#
scPharmaceuticals,#
Structure
Therapeutics,# The
Metabolic Institute of
America, Translational
Medical Academy, Vifor
Pharma,*# Vox Media,
Youngene
Therapeutics#
American Diabetes Association Staff
Elizabeth J. Pekas
American Diabetes
Association
None
None
None
None
None
None
Alexandra M.
Yacoubian
American Diabetes
Association
None
None
None
None
None
None
Designated Subject Matter Experts
Elizabeth A. Beverly
Ohio University
Heritage College of
Osteopathic
Medicine;
Ohio University
Diabetes Institute
None
None
None
None
None
Section Editor, Journal of
Osteopathic Medicine
Kenneth Cusi
University of Florida
Echosens,#
Inventiva,# Novo
Nordisk,# Poxel,#
Labcorp,*# Boeringer
Ingelheim,# Quest
Diagnostics#
None
None
None
Bristol-Myers Squibb,
GlaxoSmithKline, Lilly,
Madrigal
Pharmaceuticals,
Merck, Novo Nordisk,
ProSciento, Quest
Diagnostics, Sagimet
Biosciences, Sonic
Incytes, Terns
Pharmaceuticals
None
Audrey Darville
University of Kentucky
College of Nursing
None
None
None
None
None
Association for the
Treatment of Tobacco
Use and Dependence
(Committee Chair)
Talya K. Fleming
Hackensack Meridian
Health JFK Johnson
Rehabilitation
Institute; Rutgers
Robert Wood
Johnson Medical
School
None
None
None
None
NeuroTechR3
None
Jason L. Gaglia
Joslin Diabetes
Center, Harvard
Medical School
Avotres,*# Diamyd
Medical,*# Dompe,*#
Imcyse,*# Sanoﬁ*#
None
None
Vertex
Pharmaceuticals*#
Avotres,* Diamyd,
Imcyse, Vertex
Pharmaceuticals*
None
Continued on p. S313
S312
Disclosures
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Member
Employment
Research
grant
Other
research
support
Speakers
bureau/
honoraria
Ownership
interest
Consultant/
advisory board
Other
Rodolfo J. Galindo
University of Miami
Miller School of
Medicine
Dexcom,# Eli Lilly,#
Novo Nordisk#
None
Eli Lilly*
None
Abbott, AstraZeneca,
Bayer,* Boehringer
Ingelheim, Dexcom,
Eli Lilly,* Novo
Nordisk
American Association of
Clinical Endocrinology
(Author/Member
without compensation
for Diabetes Guidelines
2022 and T2D Algorithm
2023);
UptoDate (authorship
royalties)
Christopher H.
Gibbons
Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center,
Harvard Medical
School
None
None
None
None
CND Life Sciences
(scientiﬁc advisor)
None
John M. Giurini
Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
Mohamed Hassanein Dubai Hospital;
Mohamed Bin-Rashin
University
None
None
Eli Lilly, Servier
None
Eli Lilly, Sanoﬁ
Chair, Diabetes and
Ramadan International
Alliance;
Associate Editor, Dubai
Endocrine
Robert F. Kushner
Northwestern
University Feinberg
School of Medicine
None
Novo Nordisk
None
None
Altimmune,
Boehringer
Ingelheim, Eli Lilly,
Novo Nordisk,*
Weight Watchers*
Editor, Diabetes Care
Lisa Murdock
American Diabetes
Association
None
None
None
None
None
None
Nicola Napoli
Department of
Medicine and Surgery,
Research Unit of
Endocrinology and
Diabetes, Campus Bio
Medico, University of
Rome; Campus Bio-
Medico University
Hospital Foundation
None
None
None
None
Boehringer Ingelheim,
Eli Lilly, Novo Nordisk
None
Elizabeth Selvin
Department of
Epidemiology,
Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of
Public Health; Division
of General Internal
Medicine, Johns
Hopkins School of
Medicine
American Diabetes
Association*
None
None
None
None
Editor, Diabetes Care;
NGSP
Paolo S. Silva
Beetham Eye Institute,
Joslin Diabetes Center;
Department of
Ophthalmology,
Harvard Medical School
Optos, plc
None
Roche, Bayer,
Boehringer
Ingelheim
None
Roche, Bayer,
Boehringer Ingelheim
None
Monica Verduzco-
Gutierrez
University of Texas
Health Science Center
at San Antonio
Ipsen Pharma#
Ipsen Pharma,*
AbbVie,* Merz
Pharmaceuticals*
Ipsen Pharma,*
AbbVie,* Merz
Pharmaceuticals*
None
Ipsen Pharma,*
AbbVie,* Merz
Pharmaceuticals*
None
Crystal C. Woodward American Diabetes
Association
None
None
None
None
None
None
Zobair M. Younossi
Inova Fairfax Medical
Campus, Inova Health
System
None
None
None
None
Intercept
Pharmaceuticals,
Novo Nordisk, Siemens
None
*$$10,000 per year from company to individual. #Grant or contract is to university or other employer. §Nuha A. ElSayed, Raveendhara R.
Bannuru, and Robert A. Gabbay are also American Diabetes Association staff.
diabetesjournals.org/care
Disclosures
S313
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

Index
A1C, S5, S6, S7, S12, S20, S24, S25, S26, S27,
S56, S57, S59
advantages of, S22
age and, S23
alternatives to, S112
cardiovascular disease and, S116–S117
by CGM, S112, S113–S114
conﬁrming diagnosis with, S22
correlation with BGM, S112
diabetes distress and, S94
equivalent eAG levels, S112
for diabetes screening and diagnosis,
S21–S22
glycemic assessment by, S7, S112
hemoglobinopathies and, S22
in children, S30, S263–S264, S268, S269,
S270–S271
in cystic ﬁbrosis-related disease, S31
in gestational diabetes mellitus, S34–S35
in hyperglycemia, S64
in people with HIV, S30
in preclinical type 1 diabetes, S43
in staging type 1 diabetes, S24, S25
limitations, S7, S112
microvascular complications and, S115–S116
in prediabetes, S27–S28, S43–S44
in pregnancy, S22, S285–S286
other conditions affecting, S22
periodontal disease and, S69
point-of-care assays S21, S22, S112
race/ethnicity and, S22, S79
recommendations, S21–S22
serum glycated protein assays versus, S112
setting and modifying goals for, S113–S118
sleep and, S97
AABBCC approach, S23
acarbose, S68, S154, S174
access to care, S14
access, to insulin, S308
ACCORD study, S60, S64, S116, S117, S118,
S181, S182, S183, S192, S222, S236, S246
ACE inhibitors, S9, S56, S184, S185, S186, S195,
S202, S205, S220, S222, S223–S224, S266,
S271, S283, S289
acellular matrix tissues, S40
acute kidney injury, S151–S152, S181, S183,
S186, S222
ADA consensus reports, S4, S9, S32, S54, S80,
S88, S113, S147, S160, S164, S165, S179,
S197, S202, S245
ADA evidence-grading system, S3
ADA Professional Practice Committee, S1, S2, S309
ADA scientiﬁc reviews, S4
ADA statements, S4
ADAG study, S112
Addison disease, S24, S59, S265
adolescents. see children and adolescents.
adrenal insufﬁciency, primary, S59, S265
adult-onset diabetes. see Type 2 diabetes.
ADVANCE trial, S64, S116, S117, S118, S181,
S182, S183
advocacy statements, S307–S308
care of young children with diabetes in
the childcare setting, S307
diabetes and driving, S308
diabetes and employment, S308
diabetes care in the school setting, S308
insulin access and affordability, S308
affordability, of insulin, S308
Affordable Care Act, S14, S274
African Americans, S15, S22, S23, S26, S27, S28,
S29, S87, S221
age
aspirin use and, S193–S194
effect on A1C, S23
in diabetes diagnosis and classiﬁcation,
S23–S29
risk factor for diabetes, S29, S30
statin treatment and, S188
agricultural workers, migrant, S15–S16
AIM-HIGH trial, S192
albiglutide, S204, S205, S206
albuminuria, S9, S85, S87, S90, S119, S165,
S180, S182, S185, S186, S193, S195, S199,
S205, S207, 209–210, S219, S220, S221,
S222–S227, S265, S267, S273
alcohol intake, S6, S55, S59, S65, S81, S86, S98,
S119, S154, S184, S191, S235, S237, S283
algorithms
for diabetic retinopathy screening, S232
insulin dosing, S126, S133, S135, S222,
S246, S288, S296
to predict hypoglycemia, S300
alirocumab, S188, S189, S190
alogliptin, S172, S196, S197, S206, S299
alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, S46, S148, S172
alpha-lipoic acid, S237
ambulatory glucose proﬁle (AGP), S113, S114,
S115, S131, S286
amputation, foot, S9, S64, S202, S203, S234,
S237, S238, S239, S240
analogs. see insulin analogs.
angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), S9, S56,
S184, S222, S266, S267, S271, S284, S289
anti-VEGF agents, S233–S234
antiplatelet agents, S192–S194, S247
antipsychotics, S28, S96, S148
antiretroviral therapies, S27, S30
anxiety disorders, S15, S56, S91, S92, S93, S94,
S134, S154, S234, S263
ARRIVE trial, S193
artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms, for diabetic
retinopathy, S232
ASCEND trial, S85, S193
Asian Americans, S26, S27, S28, S29, S45, S149,
S153
aspart, S170, S173, S250
aspirin therapy, S10, S192–S194, S233, S248,
S289
ASPREE trial, S193
atenolol, S237, S289
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD),
S57, S165, S166, S168, S169, S179–S218
atorvastatin, S188, S190
autoimmune diseases, S23, S26, S59, S265–S266,
S289
autoimmune type 1 diabetes, S23, S24, S32, S268
autologous blood products, S240
automated insulin delivery (AID) systems, S7,
S8, S83, S84, S97, S116, S119, S120, S126,
S127, S133–S135, S158, S159, S160, S163,
S245, S246, S262, S263, S288, S297
autonomic neuropathy, diabetic, S59, S89, S90,
S181, S234, S235, S301
balloons, implanted gastric, S149
bariatric surgery. see metabolic surgery.
basal insulin, S10, S119, S129, S130, S131,
S132, S135, S158, S159, S160, S162, S165,
S169, S170, S171, S172, S173, S174, S250,
S252, S253, S254, S262, S264, S285, S298,
S300, S301, S302
bedtime dosing
of antihypertensives, S186
of insulin, S155, S162, S163, S248
behavioral therapy, S147–S148
behaviors, changes in, S6, S77–S110
cost considerations for medication-
taking, S6, S13–S14
diabetes self-management education and
support, S77–S80
for diabetes prevention, S44–S46
medical nutrition therapy, S80–S86
physical activity, S86–S90
in gestational diabetes, S287
psychosocial care, S91–S98
smoking cessation, S90–S91
supporting positive health behaviors, S91
well-being and, S13
bempedoic acid, S8, S187, S191
beta-carotene, S81, S85
beta-cell replacement therapy, S161, S164
biguanides, S172
bioengineered allogeneic cellular therapies, S240
bladder dysfunction, S235, S284
Blood Glucose Awareness Training, S121
blood glucose monitoring (BGM), S53, S127–S129,
S160, S163
in hospitalized patients, S297
continuous glucose monitoring, S129–S132
correlation with A1C, S112
devices for, S126–S127
during pregnancy, S284, S285
in children and adolescents, S264, S269, S271
in intensive insulin regimens, S129
in older adults, S246, S251
in people on basal insulin, oral agents, or
noninsulin injectables, S129
in schools, S127
inaccuracy of, S129
interfering substances, S129
meter standards, S128
optimizing device use, S128–S129
surveillance of, S128
blood pressure control. see also hypertension,
S180–S186, S205, S219, S222
body mass index (BMI), S7, S10, S23, S25, S26,
S31, S45, S46, S47, S56, S59, S87, S88, S146,
S149, S223,
COVID-19 mortality and, S62
effects of metformin use in pregnancy
on, S287, S288, S290
for metabolic surgery, S150, S153, S271
in obese patients, S146–S147, S148
in screening asymptomatic adults, S27
in screening asymptomatic children, S27,
S268
postpartum, S290
bone fracture risk, S59–S62, S68
bone-strengthening activities, S86, S87, S261,
S270
INDEX
S314
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

breastfeeding. see lactation.
bromocriptine, S148, S172
calcium channel blockers, S186, S224
canagliﬂozin, S62, S169, S172, S197, S200, S203,
S205, S206, S207, S224, S225
cancer, risk in diabetics, S62
cannabis, S6, S90–S91,
CANVAS study, S62, S197, S200–S201, S203,
S207, S224, S226
CANVAS-R study, S203
capsaicin, topical, S236
carbamazepine, S236
carbohydrate intake, S26, S81, S84, S86, S158,
S162–S163, S261–S262, S286
cardiac autonomic neuropathy, diabetic, S235
cardiac function testing, S272–S273
cardiovascular disease, S2, S7, S179–S218
antiplatelet agents, S192–S194
cardiac testing, S195–S196
heart failure, S8, S9, S10, S54, S57, S63, S68,
S87, S116, S117, S118, S146, S164, S166,
S167, S179–S180, S180, S181, S182, S183,
S193, S195, S196, S197, S199, S200–S208,
S221, S224–S227
hypertension/blood pressure control,
S180–S186
lifestyle and pharmacologic
interventions, S202–S205
lipid management, S186–S187
prevention of, S47
risk calculator, S180
screening, S194–S195
statin treatment, S187–S192
treatment, S196
cardiovascular risk, S14, S16, S27, S33, S47, S54,
S60, S63, S65, S67, S68, S85, S87, S88,
S116–S117, S146, S153, S164–S165, S168,
S179, S180–S184, S187, S188, S190, S191,
S193, S194, S195–S197, S202, S204, S205,
S206, S208, S210, S219–S220, S222, S223,
S226, S235, S236, S245, S247, S248, S259,
S261, S266–S267,
care delivery systems, S5
access to care and quality improvement, S14
behaviors and well-being, S13
care teams, S13
chronic care model, S12
medication cost considerations, S13–S14
six core elements, S12
system-level improvement strategies,
S12–S13
telehealth, S13
care teams, S13, S91, S92, S93, S95, S127, S136,
S273
CARMELINA trial, S196, S206
CAROLINA trial, S196, S202
celiac disease, S24, S59, S61, S259, S265–S266
CHAP trial, S184, S289
Charcot neuropathy, S9, S88, S90, S237, S238, S239
childcare, S10, S120, S262, S307
children and adolescents, S7, S9, S258–S281
A1C in, S30, S263–S264, S268, S269,
S270–S271
asymptomatic, risk-based screening in, S27
cystic ﬁbrosis-related diabetes in, S6,
S21, S23, S31, S111, S135, S258, S268,
S284
diabetes care in childcare settings, S10,
S120, S262, S307
diabetes care in school setting, S127,
S261, S262, S263, S268, S308
insulin pumps in, S7, S263, S270
maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY), S22, S32–S33
monogenic diabetes syndromes, S32–S34
neonatal diabetes, S22, S32, S33
physical activity in, S45, S86, S87
screening for type 1 risk, S26, S267
screening for prediabetes and type 2,
S27, S30, S268
substance abuse, S273
transition from pediatric to adult care,
S273–S274
type 1 diabetes in, S14, S23, S24, S46,
S261–S268
type 2 diabetes in, S268–S273
CHIPS trial, S184, S289
cholesterol lowering therapy, S9, S56, S187,
S190, S191
chronic care model, S11 S12, S52, S269
chronic kidney disease, diabetic, S8, S9, S32,
S53, S54, S56, S57, S66, S87, S117, S119,
S120, S161, S164, S165, S166, S180, S195,
S199, S209–S210, S219–S230, S244, S248,
S249, S252
acute kidney injury, S151–S152, S181,
S183, S186, S222
assessing albuminuria and GFR, S221
diagnosis, S221
epidemiology, S221
interventions for, S223–S227
referral to nephrologist, S227
risk of progression, S223, S224, S226
screening recommendations, S219
staging, S221
surveillance, S222–S223
treatment recommendations, S219–S221
chrononutrition, S83
classiﬁcation, S5, S22–S23
clonidine, S237, S289
clopidogrel, S193, S194
closed-loop systems, S135
do-it-yourself, S135
hybrid, S7, S8, S135, S159, S162, S246, S297
coaching, online, S78, S136
cognitive capacity/impairment, S96–S97
colesevelam, S148, S172
collaborative care, S52–S54, S94, S95, S197–S198
collagen vascular diseases, S59
combination therapy, S8, S164, S165, S168–S169,
S190–S191, S192, S193, S194, S205, S237, S252
community health workers, S14, S16, S45, S52,
S79, S91, S169
community screening, S30
community support, S5, S14, S16, S97, S262, S273
comorbidities, S6, S9, S12, S23, S32, S43, S47,
S52–S76
assessment of, S59–S69
autoimmune diseases, S59
bone health and fractures, S59–S62
cancer, S62
cognitive impairment/dementia, S62
COVID-19, S62–S64
disability, S64
hepatitis C, S64
hyperglycemia, S64
hypoglycemia, S64–S65
low testosterone in men, S65
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, S65–S68
obstructive sleep apnea, S68–S69
pancreatitis, S69
periodontal disease, S69
prevention or delay of, S6, S43–S51
sensory impairment, S77
COMPASS trial, S194
computerized prescriber order entry (CPOE),
S298
CONCEPTT study, S285, S286
connected insulin pens, S126, S127, S133, S161,
S263
continuous glucose monitoring (CGM), S7, S8,
S9, S10, S21, S31, S53, S55, S56, S78, S83,
S84,
S95,
S111,
S113–S117,
S126–S127,
S128, S159, S162–S163, S166
ambulatory glucose proﬁle in, S113,
S114, S115, S131, S286
assessment of glycemic status with, S113
beneﬁts of, S130
devices for, S129–S130
in hospitalized patients, S136, S297–S298,
S299–S300
in hypoglycemia prevention, S118, S121
in older adults, S246, S253
in pediatric type 1 diabetes, S263–S265
in pediatric type 2 diabetes, S269–S271
in pregnancy, S131–S132, S284, S286
initiation of device use, S127
interfering substances, S132
intermittently scanned devices, S7, S78,
S94, S129–S130, S131, S263, S264,
S269
real-time, S7, S94, S121, S129, S130,
S263, S254, S269, S284, S286, S297
side effects, S132
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII),
S126, S127, S129–S130, S133, S135, S159,
S160, S161
contraception, S149, S152, S259, S260, S263,
S266, S267, S271, S272, S273, S282–S283,
S284, S289, S291
coronary artery disease, S88, S184, S185, S186,
S194, S197, S202, S205
cost considerations, S13–S14, S149–S153,
S159–S160, S165, S169, S170, S173
counterfeit test strips, S128
COVID-19, S5, S6, S26, S28, S54–S56, S62–S64,
S80, S297
COVID-19 vaccines, S56, S58, S64–S65, S285
CREDENCE study, S62, S200–S201, S203, S207,
S225, S226
cystatin C, S221
cystic ﬁbrosis-related diabetes, S6, S21, S23,
S31, S111, S135, S258, S268, S284
Da Qing Diabetes Prevention Outcome Study,
S44, S47, S48
DAPA-CKD study, S200–S201, S203, S225, S226
DAPA-HF study, S200–S201, S203, S206, S207
dapagliﬂozin, S62, S63, S169, S172, S200–S201,
S203, S204, S206, S207, S225, S226
DARE-19 study, S63
DASH diet, S45, S82, S184, S186
DECLARE-TIMI 58 study, S200–S201, S203, S207,
S226
degludec, S159, S170, S172, S174, S250, S298
delay, of symptomatic type 1 diabetes, S48
delay, of type 2 diabetes, S5–S6, S43–S51
lifestyle behavior change, S44–S46
person-centered care goals, S47–S48
pharmacologic interventions, S46–S47
recommendations, S43, S44, S46, S4, S487
of vascular disease and mortality, S47
DELIVER study, S200–S201, S204, S207
dementia, in diabetics, S62, S64, S65, S69, S96,
S119, S192, S245–S246
diabetesjournals.org/care
Index
S315
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

demographics, of diabetes care, S12–S14
dental practices, screening in, S30, S55, S57
depression, S7, S15, S56, S88, S91, S92, S93,
S94, S95, S97, S134, S150, S154, S234, S236,
S244, S245, S248, S251, S263, S273
detemir, S162, S170, S173, S250
devices. see technology.
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT),
S21, S22, S69, S116, S159, S264, S267
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/Epide-
miology of Diabetes Interventions and Com-
plications (DCCT/EDIC), S69, S117, S120, S246
diabetes distress, S6, S9, S12, S15, S56, S91,
S92, S93–S94, S130, S159, S262, S263, S273,
S303
diabetes medical management plan (DMMP),
for students, S127
Diabetes Prevention Impact Tool Kit, S45
Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP), S27, S28,
S44, S45, S46, S48, S86, S136
Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study
(DPPOS), S28, S44, S46, S48, S47, S86, S168
Diabetes Prevention Recognition Program (DPRP),
S46
diabetes self-management education and sup-
port (DSMES), S6, S13, S16, S54, S77–S80,
S82, S94, S172
diabetes technology. see technology, diabetes.
diabetic ketoacidosis, S10, S23, S63, S64, S88,
S91, S93, S96, S121, S131, S159, S168, S203,
S208, S253, S261, S270, S284, S288, S298,
S301–S302
diabetic kidney disease. see also chronic kidney
disease.
dietary protein and, S75
diagnosis, S221
physical activity and, S90
ﬁnerenone in, S202, S206, S209–S210, S225,
S226–S227
glucose-lowering medications for, S224–S227
multiple drug therapy, S186
prevention, S222
screening for complications of, S223
Diabetic Retinopathy Study (DRS), S234
diagnosis, S5, S6, S20–S37
conﬁrmation of, S22
criteria for, S21
cystic ﬁbrosis-related, S22, S31
diabetic kidney disease, S221
diagnostic tests, S20–S22
gestational diabetes, S34–S37
maturity onset diabetes of the young
(MODY), S32, S33
monogenic diabetes syndromes, S32–S34
neonatal diabetes, S32
posttransplantation diabetes mellitus,
S31–S32
prediabetes and type 2, S26–S31
type 1, S24–S26,
diagnostic tests, S20–S22
A1C use as, S21–S22
conﬁrmation of, S22
criteria for, S21
fasting plasma glucose (FPG) test, S20,
S21, S22, S23, S24, S26, S27, S30, S32,
S34, S35, S36, S171
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), S20,
S21, S22, S26, S27, S31, S32, S33, S34,
S35, S36, S286, S290
plasma glucose test, 2-h, S20, S21, S23, S24,
S26, S27, S30, S33, S35
diet, see Medical nutrition therapy.
Dietary Reference Intakes, S287
DIAMOND trial, S246
digital health technology, S136
dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4) inhibitors, S62,
S68, S148, S166, S167, S168, S172, S196,
S202, S250, S252, S298
disordered eating behavior, S56, S82, S84, S91,
S92, S93, S95–S96, S261, S262, S263, S273,
do-it-yourself systems, S135, S159
domperidone, S237
Dose Adjusted for Normal Eating (DAFNE), S121
DRCR Retina Network, S233
driving, and diabetes, S308
droxidopa, S237
dual GLP-1/glucose-dependent insulinotropic poly-
peptide (GIP), S8, S68, S148, S149, S165, S167,
S168, S169, S170, S171, S172, S174, S252
dual GLP-1/glucose-dependent insulinotropic
polypeptide (GIP) receptor agonist, S8, S62,
S68, S148, S149, S165, S167, S168, S169,
S170, S171, S172, S174, S252
dulaglutide, S165, S169, S172, S198, S204,
S205, S206, S232,
duloxetine, S236
dyslipidemia, S12, S13, S27, S28, S47, S56,
S66, S87, S96, S97, S148, S179, S180, S191,
S192, S193, S202, S231, S234, S236, S248,
S259–S260, 266–S267, S270, S272
e-cigarettes, S6, S90–S91
eating disorders, S82, S95, S263
eating patterns, S6, S44–S45, S53, S55, S68,
S80, S81, S82, S84, S85, S93, S95, S96, S269,
education, see also diabetes self-management
education and support (DSMES).
on device use, S127
patient, S7, S13, S16, S120, S121, S239, S264
preconception, S262, S263, S273, S282–S283,
S284
staff, S10, S128, S253, S297
electrical stimulation, gastric, S237, S240
ELIXA trial, S198–S199, S204
EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial, S200, S201, S203,
S206–S207, S224
empagliﬂozin, S10, S62, S169, S172, S200–S201,
S203–S204, S205, S206, S207, S224, S226,
S269, S270, S271
EMPEROR-Preserved trial, S200–S201, S203, S207,
S226
EMPEROR-Reduced trial, S200–S201, S203, S207,
S226
employment, diabetes and, S308
enalapril, S205, S237
end-of-life care, S248, S254
enteral/parenteral feedings, S298, S300–S301
erectile dysfunction, S65, S235, S237
ertugliﬂozin, S62, S172, S200, S204, S205, S299
erythromycin, S237
erythropoietin therapy, A1C and, S22, S247
estimated average glucose (eAG), S112
ETDRS study, S233, S234
ethnicity, S2, S12, S15, S23, S25, S27, S28, S30,
S34, S45, S62, S63, S64, S79, S112, S262, S268
evidence-grading system, S3
evolocumab, S188, S189, S190–S191
EXAMINE trial, S196, S197, S206
exenatide, S172, S198, S205, S206
exercise. see physical activity.
exocrine pancreas diseases, S6, S30, S69
EXSCEL trial, S198–S199, S205,
eye exam, S55, S57, S232, S267, S272, S283
ezetimibe, statins and, S187, S189, S190, S192
family history, S23, S25, S26, S27, S28, S32, S34,
S55, S59, S62, S95, S180, S193, S268, S271
farmworkers, migrant and seasonal, S15–16
fasting, S6, S10, S20, S21, S23, S25, S35, S36,
S83, S119, S127,
fasting plasma glucose (FPG) test, S20, S21,
S22, S23, S24, S26, S27, S30, S32, S34, S35,
S36, S171
fats, dietary, S6, S81, S85, S154, S266, S272,
S284, S285, S287,
FDA standards, for glucose meters, S128
fear, of hypoglycemia, S56, S91, S92, S93, S94,
S119, S121, S159, S244, S263
fenoﬁbrate, S192, S234
ﬁbrate, S260, S272
plus statin therapy, S192
ﬁbrosis-4 index, S65, S66, S67,
FIDELIO-DKD trial, S206, S209, S226, S227
FIGARO-DKD trial, S206, S209, S227
ﬁnerenone, S195, S202, S206, S209–S210, S225,
S226–S227
ﬁsh skin graft, S240
FLOW trial, S266
ﬂuvastatin, S188
food insecurity, S15
foot care, S9, S237–S241, S268
footwear, S90, S237, S239
FOURIER trial, S189
fracture risk, S6, S59, S60–S62, S68,
gastrectomy, vertical sleeve, S153
gastric aspiration therapy, S149
gastric bypass, Roux-en-Y gastric, S153
gastric electrical stimulation, S237
gastrointestinal neuropathies, S235
gastroparesis, S8, S235, S237, S252
gemﬁbrozil, S192
genetic testing, S25, S32–S33, S66
genitourinary disturbances, S235
gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), S10, S23,
S27, S34–S37, S45, S46, S47, S81, S88, S95,
S97, S132, S232–S233, S286–S288
deﬁnition, S34
diagnosis, S35–S36
insulin, S288
lifestyle and behavioral management, S287
management of, S286–S288
medical nutrition therapy, S287
metformin, S287
one-step strategy, S35
pharmacologic therapy, S287–S28
physical activity, S287
postpartum care, S290
screening, S35–S36
sulfonylureas, S287
two-step strategy, S37
glargine, S159, S162, S169, S170, S172, S173,
S174, S250, S298
glimepiride, S169, S172, S196, S202
glipizide, S172, S252
glomerular ﬁltration rate, S8, S9, S56, S61, S85,
S119, S161, S165, S166, S167, S168, S185,
S186, S195, S196, S199, S201, S219, S220,
S221, S223, S225, S250, S267, S271
glucagon, S7, S8, S31, S118, S120–S121, S158,
S169, S170, S208, S224, S225, S231,
glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists (GLP-1
RA), S8, S28, S62, S67, S68, S116, S148, S151,
S152, S160, S164, S166, S167, S171, S172,
S173, S195, S196, S199, S204, S209, S220,
S245, S249, S269, S270, S299
glucocorticoid therapy, S301
S316
Index
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

glucose meters, S7, S119, S127, S128–S129
counterfeit strips, S128
inaccuracy, S129
interfering substances, S129
optimizing use of, S128
oxygen, S129
standards, S128
temperature, S129
glucose monitoring. see blood glucose monitoring.
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deﬁciency,
A1C and, S22, S112,
glucose-lowering therapy, S33, S148, S165
glulisine, S173, S250,
glyburide, S10, S172, S252, S286, S287
glycemic goals, S7, S8, S9, S10, S111–S125
assessment of glycemic status, S111–S113
cardiovascular disease outcome with,
S116–S117
continuous glucose monitoring, S113–S114
for nonpregnant adults, S116
in diabetic kidney disease, S223
in hospitalized patients, S296–S297
in pregnancy, S284–S285
hypoglycemia, S118–S121
intercurrent illness, S121
in older adults, S246–S249
in pediatric type 1 diabetes, S263–S265
in pediatric type 2 diabetes, S269
setting and modifying A1C goals,
S117–S118
glycemic treatment, S7, S158–S178
for adults with type 1 diabetes, S158–S164
for adults with type 2 diabetes, S164–S174
growth factors, S240
guanfacine, S237
health literacy, S14, S15, S16, S80, S119, S247,
S262, S273
health numeracy, S13, S14, S15, S16, S53, S79,
S80, S83, S84, S162, S247, S261
health promotion, S11–S19
hearing impairment, S69
heart failure, S8, S9, S10, S54, S57, S63, S68,
S87, S116, S117, S118, S146, S164, S166,
S167, S179–S180, S180, S181, S182, S183,
S193, S195, S196, S197, S199, S200–S208,
S221, S224–S227
hemodialysis, A1C and, S22, S247
hemoglobinopathies, A1C and, S35, S44, S55,
S268
hepatitis B, S222, S284
hepatitis B vaccines, S56, S58, S284
hepatitis C infection, S64, S284
hepatitis, autoimmune, S24, S265
high-intensity interval training, S6, S88
Hispanic/Latino population, S15, S22, S27, S28,
S79, S87
homelessness, S5, S14, S15, S55, S119, S262, S273
hospital care, S10, S295–S306
care delivery standards, S295–S296
continuous glucose monitoring, S297
diabetes care specialists in, S296
diabetic ketoacidosis, S301–S302
enteral/parenteral feedings, S300
glucocorticoid therapy, S301
glucose-lowering treatment in, S298–S299
glucose monitoring, S297–S298
glycemic goals in, S296–S297
hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state,
S301–S302
hypoglycemia, S299–S300
insulin therapy, S298–S299
medical nutrition therapy in, S301
medication reconciliation, S302
noninsulin therapies, S299
perioperative care, S301
preventing admissions and readmissions,
S303
self-management in, S300
standards for special situations, S300–S301
structured discharge communication, S302
transition to ambulatory setting, S295,
S302–S303
HOT trial, S182, S183
housing insecurity, S5, S15
HPS2-THRIVE trial, S192
human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV), S22, S23,
S26–S27, S30, S235, S284
human regular insulin, S170, S173, S301, S302
hybrid closed-loop systems. see automated in-
sulin delivery systems.
hydrogel, oral, S149
hyperbaric oxygen therapy, S239, S240
hyperglycemia, S10, S15, S21, S22, S23, S24,
S25, S26, S28, S30, S31–S32, S34, S35, S47,
S63, S64, S67, S68, S69, S83, S86, S88, S95,
S97, S111, S113, S115, S121, S127, S128,
S131–S132, S135, S146, S153, S165, S168,
S170, S171, S221, S231, S232, S246, S247,
S248, S251, S253, S254, S261–S262, S264,
S269, S272, S282, S284, S285, S286, S290,
S295, S296, S297, S298–S299, S301–S302
Hyperglycemia and Adverse Pregnancy Out-
come (HAPO) study, S36, S285
hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state, S10, S64,
S121, S247, S269, S270, S298, S301–S302
hypertension, S9, S12, S13, S27, S28, S45, S47,
S57, S65, S66, S85, S87, S88, S97, S116,
S146, S148, S159, S179, S180–S186, S193,
S199, S202, S205, S221, S222, S223, S224,
S225, S227, S231, S236, S244, S247, S248,
S250, S254, S259, S260, S266, S270, S271,
S272, S282, S284, S286, S288, S289
hypertriglyceridemia, S85, S159, S168, S191
hypoglycemia, S64–S65, S118–S125, S129, S130–
S132, S134–S135, S136, S150–S154, S158–
S165, S168–S169, S170, S174, S203, S208,
S210, S223, S234, S235, S244, S245–S246,
S249–S250, S251, S252, S253–S254, S261–S265,
S269, S282, S282–S288, S291, S295, S296–S297,
S298, S299–S300, S301–S302
hypogonadism, S65, S237
hypokalemia, S186, S220, S222
icosapent ethyl, S85, S191, S225
idiopathic type 1 diabetes, S27
illness, intercurrent, glycemic targets in, S121,
S129
immune checkpoint inhibitors, S23, S26
immune-mediated diabetes, S24
immunizations, S54–S59
impaired fasting glucose (IFG), S21, S24, S27,
S28, S43, S48
impaired glucose tolerance (IGT), S21, S24, S27,
S28, S36, S43, S47, S48
inclisiran, S9, S187, S189–S191
incretin-based therapies, S31, S69, S252
Indian Diabetes Prevention Program (IDPP-1), S46
infections, S5, S26, S31–S32, S54–S59, S63, S64,
S90, S134, S235, S239, S251, S252, S301
inﬂuenza vaccines, S56–S57, S58
inhaled insulin, S8, S133, S158, S160, S173
injection techniques, S133, S161, S160–S161
inpatient care. see hospital care.
insulin analogs, S8, S134, S158, S159, S162,
S169, S170, S174, S252, S264, S298, S302
insulin delivery, S7, S8, S57, S83, S132–S136
automated systems, S7, S8, S83, S84–S85,
S97, S116, S119, S120, S126, S127,
S135, S158, S159, S160, S163, S245,
S246, S262, S263, S288, S297
do-it-yourself closed-loop systems, S135,
S159
injection techniques, S133, S161, S160–S161
IV, transitioning to SC, S298–S299
pens and syringes, S132–S133
pumps, S133–S136
insulin pump therapy, S128, S130, S131,
S133–S136, S160, S162, S264, S270
insulin resistance, S22, S23, S25, S27, S28, S30, S31,
S47, S62, S65, S66, S67, S87, S97, S170, S172,
S272, S284, S285, S286, S287, S288, S289, S298
insulin secretagogues, S81, S88, S89, S120, S148,
S252
insulin therapy
access and affordability, S308
basal, S10, S119, S129, S130, S131, S132,
S135, S158, S159, S160, S162, S165,
S169, S170, S171, S172, S173, S174,
S250, S252, S253, S254, S262, S264,
S285, S298, S300, S301, S302
cost considerations, S173
dosing algorithms using machine
learning, S126, S133, S135, S222,
S246, S288, S296
in adults with type 1 diabetes, S158–S164
in adults with type 2 diabetes, S164–S174
combination injectable, S174
concentrated insulins, S170, S288, S299
in hospitalized patients, S298–S299
inhaled insulin, S8, S133, S158, S160, S173
in older adults, S250–S253
prandial, S128, S160, S170, S171, S174,
S250, S262, S270, S298, S300
insulin:carbohydrate ratio (ICR), S162
integrated CGM devices, S130
intensiﬁcation
of obesity treatment, S8, S149
of diabetes therapy, S8, S160, S164, S168,
S169, S174, S197 S141, S143, S149, S151, S154,
S176
intermittent fasting, S83
intermittently scanned CGM devices, S7, S78,
S94, S129–S130, S131, S263, S264, S269
International Association of the Diabetes and
Pregnancy Study Groups (IADPSG), S34–S37
islet transplantation, S161, S164
isradipine, S237
juvenile-onset diabetes. see immune-mediated
diabetes.
KDIGO study, S9, S80, S221, S224
ketoacidosis, diabetic, S10, S23, S63, S64, S88,
S91, S93, S96, S121, S131, S159, S168, S203,
S208, S253, S261, S270, S284, S288, S298,
S301–S302
kidney disease. see chronic kidney disease.
Kumamoto study, S116
lactation, S290–S291
language barriers, S16
latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA), S23
Latino/Hispanic population, S15, S22, S27, S28,
S79, S87
diabetesjournals.org/care
Index
S317
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

LEADER trial, S198–S199, S204, S224
lifestyle behavior changes, S44–S46
delivery and dissemination of, S45–S46
Diabetes Prevention Program, S44
for diabetes prevention, S44–S46
for hypertension, S184
for lipid management, S186–S187
for weight management, S147–S148
in older adults, S249
in pediatric type 1 diabetes, S259,
S266–S267
in pediatric type 2 diabetes, S259,
S268–S271
in pregnancy, S286
nutrition, S44–S45
physical activity, S45
to reduce ASCVD risk factors, S180, S184
type 1 diabetes progression and, S46
linagliptin, S172, S196, S202–S203, S206, S271
lipase inhibitors, S151
lipid management, S146, S186–S187, S236, S247,
S254
lipid proﬁles, S56, S186, S187, S259–S260, S266,
S267
liraglutide, S46, S68, S149, S151, S164, S169,
S172, S173, S174, S198, S204–S205, S206,
S224, S232
lispro, S170, S172, S173, S250
lixisenatide, S173, S174, S198, S204, S206
long-acting insulin, S159, S169, S170, S252,
S264, S269, S270
Look AHEAD trial, S63, S69, S83, S147, S202,
S249
loss of protective sensation, S235, S237, S238
lovastatin, S188
machine learning, insulin dosing algorithms
using, S296
macular edema, diabetic, S232–S234, S252
marijuana. see cannabis.
maternal history, in screening children/adoles-
cents, S27
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY),
S23, S32–S33, S268
meal planning, S80, S82–S83, S84, S284
Medicaid expansion, S14
medical devices, for weight loss, S149
medical evaluation, S2, S3, S6, S52–S76, S146,
S161, S187
autoimmune diseases, S59
bone health, S59
cancer, S62
cognitive impairment/dementia, S62
comorbidities, S59–S62
comprehensive, S54, S55–S56
COVID-19, S62–S64
disability, S64
hepatitis C, S64
hyperglycemia, S64
hypoglycemia, S64–S65
immunizations, S54–S59
low testosterone in men, S65
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, S66–S68
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, S66–S68
obstructive sleep apnea, S68–S69
pancreatitis, S69
periodontal disease, S69
sensory impairment, S69
statins, S69
medical nutrition therapy, S6, S45, S54, S57, S77,
S80–S88, S113, S128, S154, S187, S259–S260,
S261, S285
alcohol, S86
carbohydrates, S84–S85
eating patterns and meal planning, S82–S83
fats, S85
food insecurity and access, S82
goals of, S80
in children and adolescents with type 1
diabetes, S261
in hospitalized patients, S301–S302
in pregnancy. S287
micronutrient, and supplements, S85–S86
nonnutritive sweeteners, S86
protein, S85
sodium, S85
weight management, S80–S82
Mediterranean diet, S6, S45, S68, S81, S82, S85,
S186
meglitinides, S9, S115, S117, S119, S148, S165,
S172, S245, S249, S252
mental health. see Psychosocial care.
mental health referrals, S93, S95, S96
mental illness, serious, S97
metabolic surgery, S7, S8, S10, S58, S67, S68,
S80, S93, S145, S146, S148, S149, S153–S154,
S164, S168, S271
metformin, S10, S46–S47, S56, S61–S62, S63,
S68, S86, S116, S117, S148, S161, S165,
S168, S169, S170, S172, S195, S196, S198,
S200,
S206,
S210,
S224,
S225,
S245,
S250–S252, S260, S269, S270–S271, S272,
S286, S287–S288, S290, S301,
metoclopramide, S237
metoprolol, S206, S237
micronutrients, S80, S81, S83, S85–S86
microvascular complications, S2, S7, S12, S28, S31,
S33, S48, S55, S90, S96, S113, S115–S116, S117,
S159, S164, S189, S181, S234, S267–S268, S270,
S283,
midodrine, S237
miglitol, S172
migrant farmworkers, S15–S16
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist therapy, S8,
S185, S186, S220, S222, S223, S225, S226–S227
monogenic diabetes syndromes, S22, S32–S34
multiple daily injections (MDI), S55, S128, S129,
S130, S131, S132, S133–S134, S135, S160,
S162–S163, S270
myasthenia gravis, S24, S59, S256
naltrexone/bupropion ER, S150
nateglinide, S46, S172, S252
National Diabetes Data Group, S36
National Diabetes Prevention Program, S45
National
Health
and
Nutrition
Examination
Survey (NHANES), S12, S35, S69, S268
neonatal diabetes, S22, S32, S33, S258
nephrologist, referral to, S220, S221, S227
nephropathy, diabetic, S10, S28, S59, S60, S62,
S97, S115, S164, S186, S196, S199, S201,
S203, S224–S225, S231, S238, S259, S260,
S267, S270, S271, S284
neurocognitive function, S245
neuropathic pain, S64, S235, S236–S237, S268
neuropathy, diabetic, S9, S46, S54, S57, S59, S60,
S64, S69, S86, S88, S97, S115, S116, S119,
S120, S134, S169, S180, S202, S234–S237,
S239, S259, S267–S268, S272, S284, S301
auditory, S69
autonomic, S59, S88, S90, S181, S234, S235,
S301
cardiac autonomic, S235
gastrointestinal, S235
genitourinary disturbances due to, S235
peripheral, S46, S59, S64, S78, S86, S90,
S235, S238
new-onset diabetes after transplantation (NODAT),
S31–S32
niacin 1 statin therapy, S192
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), S55, S57,
S65–S68, S284
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), S57, S65–S68,
S167
noninsulin treatments, S23, S25, S32, S68, S127,
S129, S131, S132, S161–S164, S168, S169,
S170, S172, S249, S250, S251, S269, S286,
S295, S298, S299, S300, S302, S308
noninsulin-dependent diabetes. see type 2 diabetes.
nonnutritive sweeteners, S6, S81, S86
NPH insulin, S159, S160, S163, S169, S170,
S171, S172, S173, S174, S250, S252, S298,
S300–S301
nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, S32
nursing homes, S253–S254
nutrition, S6, S11, S13, S16, S22, S30, S35,
for diabetes prevention/delay, S44–S45
nutrition therapy. see medical nutrition therapy.
obesity, S7–S8, S9, S10, S26, S27, S28, S30, S34,
S44, S48, S55, S62, S65, S66, S67–S69,
S80–S81, S145–S157
assessment and monitoring, S145–S147
medical devices for weight loss, S149
metabolic surgery, S149, S153–S154
nutrition, physical activity, and
behavioral therapy, S147–S148
pharmacotherapy, S148–S149,
S150–S152
obstructive sleep apnea, S55, S56, S68–S69,
S97, S173, S186, S199, S260, S272
ODYSSEY OUTCOMES trial, S189
older adults, S9, S15, S57, S58, S244–S257
bone health in, S59–S62
end-of-life care, S254
hypoglycemia, S245–S246
lifestyle management, S249
neurocognitive function, S245
pharmacologic therapy, S250–S253
in skilled nursing facilities and nursing
homes, S253–S254
special considerations for, S253
treatment goals, S246–S249
with type 1 diabetes, S245, 246
one-step strategy, for GDM, S35–S36
opioid antagonist/antidepressant combination, S150
opioids, S236, S237
ophthalmologist, referral to, S90, S232, S233
oral agents. see also speciﬁc drugs. S129, S253,
S254, S288
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), S20, S21,
S22, S26, S27, S31, S32, S33, S34, S35, S36,
S286, S290
organ transplantation, posttransplantation
diabetes mellitus, S23, S31–S32
orlistat, S46, S150
orthostatic hypotension, S182, S234, S235, S237
overweight people, S9, S10, S27, S28, S30, S44,
S45, S48, S67, S80, S81, S86, S87, S116,
S146–S147, S148, S149, S180, S249,
children and adolescents, S9–S10, S26, S27,
S268–270,
during pregnancy, S284, S288, S290
oxygen, glucose monitors and, S129
oxygen therapy, S240
for advanced wound care, S240
S318
Index
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

hyperbaric, S239, S240
topical, S237, S239, S240–S241
P2Y12 receptor antagonists, S193, S195
palliative care, S248, S253, S254
pancreas transplantation, S161, S164
pancreatectomy, S31, S69, S135
pancreatic diabetes, S6, S30–S31
pancreatitis, S6, S23, S27, S30, S31, S69,
S151–S152, S191, S205, S272
paramedics, S14, S16, S45, S52, S79, S91, S169
pens, insulin, S7, S126, S127, S132–S133
periodontal disease, S30, S69
perioperative care, S10, S301
peripheral arterial disease, S238–S239
peripheral neuropathy, S46, S59, S64, S78, S86,
S90, S235, S238
pernicious anemia, S24, S59
person-centered care goals, S12, S47–S48, S12
pharmacologic approaches. see also speciﬁc
medications, medication classes.
for adults with type 1 diabetes,
S158–S164
for adults with type 2 diabetes, S164–S174
for cardiovascular and renal disease, S7
S202–S205, S209–S210, S227
for comorbidities, S57
for hypertension, S184–S186
for lipid management, S188–S192
for neuropathic pain, S64, S235,
S236–S237, S268
for obesity, S7, S148–S149, S150–S153
for pediatric type 2 diabetes, S269–S271
for smoking cessation, S90
in older adults, S249–S253
in pregnancy, S287–S288, S289
interfering substances for glucose meter
readings, S129
to delay or prevent type 2 diabetes, S46–S47
to delay type 1 progression, S48
to glycemic treatment, S8, S158–S178
phentermine, S46, S149, S150, S152, S271
phentermine/topiramate ER, S150
phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors, S237
photocoagulation surgery, S233–S234
physical activity, S6, S10, S11, S28, S55, S57,
S61, S64, S111, S127, S128, S135, S202
exercise and youth, S87
for diabetes prevention, S44, S45–S46
frequency and type of, S87
glycemic control and, S88
high-intensity interval training, S88
in children with type 1 diabetes, S261–S262
in children with type 2 diabetes, S269
in DSMES, S86–S90
in obesity management, S147–S148
in older adults, S249
in pregnancy, S287
with diabetic kidney disease, S90
with microvascular complications, S90
pre-exercise evaluation, S88
pioglitazone, S47, S62, S67, S68, S172
PIONEER-6 trial, S198–S199
pitavastatin, S188
plasma glucose test, 2-h, S20, S21, S23, S24, S26,
S27, S30, S33, S35
pneumococcal pneumonia vaccine, S57, S58
point-of-care assays
A1c, S21, S22, S112
blood glucose monitoring, S136, S297
polycystic ovary syndrome, S27, S28, S260, S272,
S273, S284, S286, S287
population health, S5, S11–S19
access to care, S14
behaviors and well-being, S13
care teams, S13
chronic care model, S12–S13
cost considerations, S13–S14
quality improvement, S14
recommendations, S11
tailoring treatment for social context,
S14–S16
status and demographics, S12
telehealth, S13
postbariatric hypoglycemia, S154
postpartum care, in diabetic women, S289–S291
posttransplantation diabetes mellitus, S23,
S31–S32
pramlintide, S161, S172, S237
prandial insulin, S128, S160, S170, S171, S174,
S250, S262, S270, S298, S300
pravastatin, S188
prediabetes, S5, S10, S21
criteria deﬁning, S22
diagnosis, S27–S28
lifestyle changes for prevention of diabetes,
S44–S46
prevention of vascular disease and mortality,
S47
screening in adults, S26, S27, S28–S30
screening in children and adolescents, S30
preeclampsia, in women with diabetes, S34,
S35, S184, S282, S284, S285–S286, 288
aspirin and, S289
pregabalin, S148, S236
pregnancy, S10, S282–S294
A1C and, S22, S285–S286
continuous glucose monitoring in, S286
drug considerations in, S89
gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), S23,
S34–S37, S287–S288
glucose monitoring in, S285
glycemic goals in, S284–S286
insulin physiology in, S288
lactation, S290
lifestyle and behavior management, S287
medical nutrition therapy, S287
metformin in, S287
pharmacologic therapy, S287–S288
physical activity in, S287
postpartum care, S289–S291
pre-existing type 1 and 2 diabetes in,
S288–S289
preconception care, S283–S284
preconception counseling, S282–S283
preeclampsia and aspirin, S289
real-time CGM device use in, S131–S132
retinopathy during, S232–S233
sulfonylureas, S287
prevention, type 2 diabetes, S6, S7, S9, S14, S27,
S28, S43–S51
lifestyle behavior change for, S44–S43
person-centered care goals, S47–S48
pharmacologic interventions, S46–S47
of vascular disease and mortality, S47
proliferative diabetic retinopathy, S90, S233
proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9
(PCSK9) inhibitors, S8, S30, S187, S188, S189,
S190, S192
protease inhibitors, A1C and, S30
protein intake, S9, S10, S85, S158, S220, S223,
S249, S270, S271
psychosocial care, S6, S9, S77, S91–S98
anxiety disorders, S94
assessment and treatment, S92–S93
cognitive capacity/impairment, S96–S97
depression, S95
diabetes distress, S93–S94
disordered eating behavior, S95–S96
in pediatric type 1 diabetes, S261,
S262–S263
in pediatric type 2 diabetes, S273
referral to mental health specialist, S93,
S95, S96
screening, S92
serious mental illness, S96
sleep health, S97
pumps, insulin, S133–S136
do-it-yourself closed-loop system, S135, S159
in youth, S7, S134, S263, S270
sensor augmented, S134
quality improvement, S5, S14, S295, S299
RAAS inhibitors, S163
race, S22, S27, S63, S64, S79, S112, S148, S196,
S198, S200, S221
rapid-acting insulin analog, S134, S135, S159,
S160, S163, S170, S173, S250, S254, S262,
S285, S298, S299, S301, S302
real-time CGM devices, S7, S94, S121, S129,
S130, S263, S254, S269, S284, S286, S297
REDUCE-IT trial, S85, S191
referrals, S6, S14, S16, S66, S78
for behavioral health professionals, S92
for community screening, S30
for comprehensive eye exam, S57, S267
for food insecurity, S82
for initial care management, S57
for local community resources, S16
for DSME, S54, S57, S78, S79
for tobacco cessation, S54
from dentist to primary care, S57
to behavioral health provider, S92, S93
to foot care specialist, S239
to gastroenterologist, S65, S69
to mental health professional, S93, S95, S96
to nephrologist, S220, S221, S227
to neurologist, S235
to sleep specialist, S98, S260
to registered dietitian nutritionist, S45,
S57, S149, S261, S265, S283, S302
registered dietitian nutritionist (RDN), S45, S57,
S80, S82, S282, S285, S287, S288 43, S255,
S257, S274
reimbursement, S14, S45
for CGM in adults with type 2 diabetes, S9
for DSMES, S6, S78, S79
religious fasting, S83
repaglinide, S172, S252
resistance training, S45, S68, S88, S249
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) vaccine, S57–S58
retinopathy, diabetic, S66, S90, S115, S227,
S231–S234, S267, S272, S283
screening, S232–S233
treatment, S233–S234
visual rehabilitation, S234
REWIND trial, S198–S199, S204
risk calculator, for ASCVD, S180
risk management
cardiovascular disease, S8, S179–S218
chronic kidney disease, S9, S219–S230
risk, screening for
type 1 diabetes, S26
prediabetes and type 2, S27, S29
rivaroxaban, S193, S194
diabetesjournals.org/care
Index
S319
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

rosiglitazone, S148
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, S153
SAVOR-TIMI trial, S196, S206
saxagliptin, S172, S196, S206, S299
schizophrenia, S96
schools, diabetes care in, S127, S261, S262, S263,
S268, S308
screening, S5, S6, S7, S9
after acute pancreatitis, S31
by age, S30,
community, S30
for cystic ﬁbrosis -related diabetes, S31
for gestational diabetes mellitus, S34, S36
for neuropathy, S235–S236
for prediabetes and type 2 diabetes, S26–S30
for type 1 diabetes, S26
for type 2 diabetes, S27 S240
in children/adolescents, S30
in dental practices, S30, S55, S57
in people with HIV, S30
medications, S30
testing interval, S30
use of A1C for, S21–S22
use of FPG or 2-h PG for, S21
seasonal farmworkers, S15–S16
self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG). see
blood glucose monitoring (BGM)
semaglutide, S8, S46, S68, S148, S149, S150,
S165, S168, S169, S172, S198–S199, S204,
S205, S206, S224–S225, S226, S232, S252
sensor-augmented pumps, S134
sensory impairment, S69
setmelanotide, S149
sexual dysfunction, S235
sickle cell disease, A1C and, S22, S112, S284
simvastatin, S188, S189, S192
sitagliptin, S169, S172, S196, S206
skilled nursing facilities, S251, S253–S254
sleep health, S7, S97–S98
smart pens. see connected insulin pens
smoking cessation, S6, S10, S47, S55, S59, S77,
S90–S91, S273
social capital, S5, S14, S15
social context, S14–S16
social determinants of health (SDOH), S12, S13,
S14–S15, S16, S79, S92, S166
sodium channel blockers, S235, S236
sodium intake, S81, S84, S85, S184, S223
sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibi-
tors, S8, S28, S62, S68, S84, S116, S148,
S164, S166, S167, S172, S180, S195, S201,
S209, S220, S222, S225, S246, S250, S252,
S270, S299
SOLOIST-WHF trial, S208
sotagliﬂozin, S206, S207, S208
SPRINT trial, S181, S182, S183, S205
staging
of diabetic kidney disease, S57, S221–S222
of type 1 diabetes, S24
statin therapy, S8, S9, S47, S67–S68, S116,
S180, S187, S187–S192,
combination therapy with, S190–S191
diabetes risk with, S192
high- and moderate intensity, S188
intolerance to, S190
primary prevention, S187, S188
secondary prevention, S188–S189
with bempedoic acid, S8, S187, S191
with ezetimibe, S189
with ﬁbrate, S169, S170, S192
with niacin, S169, S170
with PCSK9 inhibitors, S189–S190
statins, S26, S30, S57, S69, S85, S192, S197,
S198, S202
stem cell therapies, for wounds, S240
strength training, S44, S269
sulfonylureas, S9, S15, S32, S33, S62, S68, S113,
S115, S116, S117, S119, S120, S148, S165,
S168, S172, S174, S245, S249, S250, S252, S287
supplements, dietary, S61, S81, S85–S86, S141,
S148, S154, S283, S284
surveillance
behavioral risk factor surveillance system, S79,
S94
BGM system, S128
for foot problems, S237, S238–S239
of chronic kidney disease, S222–S223
of NAFLD patients, S66
SUSTAIN-6 trial, S198–S199, S204, S224
sweeteners, nonnutritive, S6, S81, S86
sympathomimetic amine anorectics, S150
in combination with antiepileptic, S150
syringes, insulin, S132–S133
tapentadol, S236
technology, diabetes, S7, S8, S13, S126–S144
blood glucose monitoring, S127–S129
continuous glucose monitoring devices,
S129–S132
general device principles, S126–S127
insulin delivery, S132–S137
technology-assisted prevention programs, S44,
S45–S46, S79, S94
TECOS trial, S196, S206
TEDDY study, S26, S46
telehealth, S6, S13, S15, S45, S78–S80, S286
temperature
of glucose monitor, S129
perception of, S56, S234, S235, S237, S238
teplizumab, S48
testing interval, S30
testosterone
in diabetes prevention, S46
low, in men, S65
tetanus, diphtheria, pertussis (TDAP) vaccine,
S58, S284
thiazide-like diuretics, S185, S186, S224
thiazolidinediones, S46, S59, S60, S148, S165,
S206, S245, S252
thyroid disease
autoimmune, S33, S59, S266
in pediatric type 1 diabetes, S259, S265
time-restricted eating, S83
tirzepatide, S46, S62, S68, S148, S149, S152,
S165, S168, S169, S172, S252
tobacco use/cessation, S6, S10, S47, S55, S59,
S77, S90–S91, S273
training
blood glucose awareness, S121
health professionals/staff, S10, S13, S16, S79
high-intensity interval, S6, S88
on device use, S10
resistance, S6, S44, S45, S68, S79, S88
self-care, S16
strength, S44, S269
tramadol, S236
transfusion, A1C and, S22, S112, S247
transition
from hospital to ambulatory setting,
S295, S302–S303
from IV to SC insulin, S298–S299
from pediatric to adult care, S258,
S273–S274
transplantation
islet, S161, S164
liver, S65, S66
organ, post-transplant diabetes mellitus
after, S23, S31–S32
pancreas, S161, S164
renal, S161, S164, S196, S201, S207,
S208, S221, S225
tricyclic antidepressants, S148, S235, S236
TWILIGHT trial, S194
two-hour plasma glucose (2-h PG) test, S20,
S21, S23, S24, S26, S27, S30, S33, S35
two-step strategy, for GDM, S36
type 1 diabetes, S5, S6, S7, S8, S9, S10, S13, S14
beta-cell replacement therapy, S161, S164
in children/adolescents, S233–S240
classiﬁcation, S22–S23
diagnosis, S24–S26
idiopathic, S27
immune-mediated, S24, S26
in hospitalized patients, S296, S298, S300
lifestyle and progression of, S46
insulin therapy, S158, S159–S160
noninsulin treatments, S161, S164
in older adults, S245, 246
peripheral neuropathy in, S234–S236
pregnancy in women with preexisting,
S283, S284, S285, S286, S288, S290
retinopathy in, S232
screening, S26
staging, S24
subcutaneous insulin regimens,
S159–S161, S163–S164
surgical treatment, S164
teplizumab to delay symptoms. S48
type 2 diabetes, S5, S6, S7, S8, S9, S10, S12,
S13, S15, S22–S23
in children/adolescents, S268–S273
classiﬁcation, S20–S22
combination therapy, S8, S164, S165,
S168–S169, S190–S191, S192, S193,
S194, S205, S237, S252
diagnosis, S26–S31
insulin pump use in, S135
obesity and weight management, S29,
S67, S145–S157, S165, S168
pharmacologic treatment in adults,
S164–S174
pregnancy in women with preexisting,
S288–S289
prevention or delay, S6, S7, S9, S14, S27,
S28, S43–S51
retinopathy in, S233
risk test for, S29
screening in asymptomatic adults, S27,
S28, S29
screening in children/adolescents, S28, S30
surgical treatment for, S164
type 3c diabetes, S30
UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS), S116,
S117, S197, S205
ulcers, foot, S9, S56, S88, S90, S234, S237–S241
ultra-rapid-acting insulin analogs, S159, S160, S163
ultrasound wound debridement, S240
vaccines. see immunizations.
vagus nerve stimulator, S149
vascular disease, S90, S116, S117, S181, S183,
S192, S194, S202, S237
prevention of, in prediabetes, S47
VERIFY trial, S168
S320
Index
Diabetes Care Volume 47, Supplement 1, January 2024
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

vertical sleeve gastrectomy, S153
VERTIS CV trial, S200, S201, S204
Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial (VADT), S64,
S116, S246
vildagliptin, S168
vitamin D supplementation, S46, S56, S60, S61,
S81, S85–S86, S148
VOYAGER-PAD trial, S194
weight loss surgery. see metabolic surgery.
weight loss/management, S7, S8, S31, S31,
S80–S82, S83, S86, S87, S93, S96, S117,
S136, S145–S154, S184, S186, S202,
S236,
in diabetes prevention, S44–S46, S47, S48
in children/adolescents, S269, S271, S272
in older adults, S249, S251, S252
in pregnancy, S290
in type 1 diabetes, S46, S61, S161
in type 2 diabetes, S29, S67, S165, S168
medical devices for, S150
metabolic surgery for, S149, S153–S154
pharmacotherapy for, S148–S149, S150–S152
with NAFLD, S67–S68
unexpected, S21, S23, S20, S24, S28, S62,
S95, S253
well-being, S6, S13, S35, S53, S65, S77–S110,
S146, S234, S263
whites, non-Hispanic, S22, S25, S27, S60, S63,
S112, S196, S198, S200,
WISDM trial, S246
Wound therapy, advanced, S239–S241
Youth. see Children and adolescents.
zoster vaccine, S59
diabetesjournals.org/care
Index
S321
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

The American Diabetes Association® has a podcast for everyone, 
whether you’re a person with diabetes, a health care professional,
or a researcher:  
 
▪  Diabetes Care On Air 
 
▪  Diabetes Core Update
  
▪  diabetesBio 
 
▪  Diabetes Day by Day
Diabetes Information On the 
Go—Anytime, Anywhere
Listen Now
©AmericanDiabetesAssociation

